# SOURCE: 3.Siah Makan Drilling fluid.docx

📄 فایل 164 از 214  |  3.Siah Makan Drilling fluid.docx
Typical Drilling Fluid Program
Siah Makan Field
NISCO Projects

# Objective:
In this section the typical Mud Program(Group 1) of Saih Makan Oil Field wells are prepared and also individual Mud Program for any designated well will be prepared separately.

# Mud Program Summary:

# 26'' Hole Section: (0-150m)
This section will be drilled ±150 mt. through Aghajari Formation. Aghajari Formation consists of red and grey silty marls that interbedded with sandstone This hole section will be drilled by using 63 -76 p c f Hi-vis pill, in case of any Torque , mud can be lubricated with 3-4% by volume of diesel.
PHB or XC-Polymer pill will be used to clean the hole and since Bentonite has the best cake around the well bore, it will make a good cake for hole stability.
Note:
If drilling water has the chloride concentration more than 6000 mg/Lit Bentonite will not hydrated well and Polymer mud will be used as drilling mud.
Formulation & Properties

# 26” Hole Section Mud Material Requirement

# 17 1/2” Hole Section: (150m- ±2677m)
The 17-1/2" section will be drilled from 18-5/8” Casing Shoe @150 mt. in Aghajari formation to ±2677mt. in Gachsaran formation (before high pressure zone) that totally consists of a repetition of Anhydrite, grey and red marl as well as salt and some limestone beds. In each depth by well dictated previous mud in hole (Bentonite mud) will be displace by Salt Water/ Inhibited Salt Water / Inhibited Polymer Mud. At this system uses Salt/KCl as the source of density and Clay inhibition in the system. Mud weight will be Increase from 67 to 96 pcf by Salt and Barite as weighting agent. Rheology will be controlled by the use of XC polymer. Also Fluid loss will be keep under control by the addition of polymeric chemicals such as, Starch LV . In case of any bit balling, Tight Hole, Heavy ream and back ream and other abnormal hole problems while drilling or penetrations, addition of Drilling Detergent and KCl (3-5 % wt. As contingency) to the mud system can prevent bit balling and consequently can help to optimize the drilling operation while drilling sticky Marl and Clay section. Fluid loss should be kept below 6 cc, meanwhile drilling and before to reach casing point .
Also pH should be maintained within 9 - 9.5 while drilling Marl and keep within 9.5 – 10 while
Drilling Anhydrite.
At this section for the inhibition of system might be use PHPA ( 0.2 – 0.3 ppb ) which adheres to the surface of the drilled cuttings, encapsulating them, and also coating the well bore reducing the hydration of clays in the formation.
Interval Mud Discussion:
After drilling shoe track and rate hole with carried Bentonite mud from previous section, we continue to drilling till well will be dictated to change the mud to Salt Water or Salt/KCl/Polymer mud will be employed to drilling this hole section.
Saturated Salt Muds are primarily used to prevent excessive hole enlargement while drilling massive salt beds. They can also be used to reduce dispersion and hydration of shales and clays. Potassium chloride is the primary source of the potassium ions in this system. In case of soft, sticky red Marl & Clay which encountered problems such as bit balling additions of drilling KCl (3 – 5 %) to inhibit clays Gachsaran formation is recommended.
Potassium is used in areas where inhibition is required to limit chemical alteration of shales. Potassium performance is based on cationic exchange of potassium for sodium or calcium ions on smectites and interlayered clays. Potassium-based muds perform best on shales containing large quantities of smectite or interlayered clays in the total clay fraction. Shallow shales, containing large amounts of montmorillonite.
Potassium interactions with clay surfaces can be traced to two effects: ionic size and hydration energy. Potassium ions are of the proper size to fit snugly into the spaces between the two
silica tetrahedral layers which contact each other in the formation of a three-layer clay packet. The ionic diameter of potassium is 2.66 Å, very close to the available distance of 2.8 Å in the lattice space of the clay structure. A cation slightly smaller than 2.8 Å is desirable to allow for crystalline compaction.
In addition of using KCl, despite Gachsaran formation is an un-permeable formation and seems that isn’t necessary to control Fluid loss, Starch and PAC LV may be used to keep FL under control.
While drilling this section XC Polymer will be used as base of rheology to extend hole cleaning and providing suitable YP and LSRV. An YP between 15-20 lb/100ft2 for sufficient carrying capacity and a LSRYP at range of 7-15 to preventing any Barite sag in system is required.
As it is seen in geological forecast, soft & sticky marls referred as Gumbo, contained large amount of Smectite and/or Illite could be associated with problems such as bit balling, mud rings, plugged flow lines and hole washout& cause low process of drilling and unnecessary trips and some more difficulties to drill the section as fast as possible. With all those problems reduction of ROP was inevitable, blinding of shaker screens, excessive over pull on trips, washout and stuck pipes has been experienced as well. For problem Solve can add 3-5% KCl in system.
In case of necessary the inhibition of system can be increased by adding PHPA which adheres to the surface of the drilled cuttings, encapsulating them, and also coating the well bore reducing the hydration of clays in the formation.
Also while drilling this section encounter with Ca2+ based Gypsum is inventible. Gyp is calcium sulfate with water of crystallization (CaSO4.2H2O), Calcium sulfate contamination is similar to cement contamination because both liberate calcium ions, which in turn cause flocculation. Unlike cement, calcium sulfate does not cause a pH increase since it supplies a sulfate ion in lieu of an hydroxyl ion. The sulfate ion contributes to flocculation of clay solids, although its effect is small compared to calcium ions. The severity of flocculation depends to a great degree on clay content. When CaSO4 causes the calcium concentration to increase and viscosity may fluctuate drastically. As calcium ion concentrations further increase, a base exchange occurs in which sodium montmorillonite becomes calcium montmorillonite. There are several methods for handling CaSO4 contamination. The drilling fluid can be maintained as a low-calcium fluid by chemically precipitating by adding soda ash.
Formulation & Properties

# 17 ½” Hole Section Mud Material Requirement

# 12 1/4” Hole Section: (±2677m- ±3313m)
The 12 1/4" section will be drilled from 13-3/8” Casing Shoe @ ±2677 mt. in Gachsaran formation to ±3313 mt.(Cap Rock) . Deposition of the Gachsaran Formation is cyclic. This formation totally consists of a repetition of Anhydrite, grey and red marl as well as salt and some limestone beds. The carried mud from previous section will be used for start of drilling this section after performing necessary treatments.
It is necessary to adjust mud weight and mud properties as hole condition dictate. Some tight hole, well flow , severe losses and low ROP maybe experienced in this hole section. The drilling
fluid engineer will advise the drilling supervisor of any extended circulation or sweep requirement . It uses clarified viscosifier to provide viscosity and carrying capacity and starch to reduce mud filtrate.
Interval Mud Discussion:
After drilling shoe track and rate hole with carried Bentonite mud from previous section Salt
Water or Salt/KCl/Polymer mud will be employed to drilling this hole section.
Saturated Salt Muds are primarily used to prevent excessive hole enlargement while drilling massive salt beds. They can also be used to reduce dispersion and hydration of shales and clays. Salt and Salt Saturated Muds are used to prevent excessive hole enlargement while drilling massive salt beds. They can also be used to reduce dispersion and hydration of shales and clays. Solids content (percent by volume) should be maintained within a desired range by mechanical removal or dilution with saturated salt water to prevent unacceptable increases in gel strengths and viscosity. The chloride content of saturated salt muds is 188,000 mg/l at saturation. As the temperature of the mud increases, more salt is able to go into solution. This means that a fluid which is saturated under surface conditions may not be saturated in down hole temperatures and can cause substantial washout  in  a salt zone due to increased salt solubility. Control of the pH of saturated salt muds varies widely. Saturated salt muds require larger additions of caustic soda to maintain a pH in Salt Saturate Muds. Maintaining an ± 9.5 pH offers several advantages:
De flocculants are more effective
Corrosion is reduced
Lower concentrations of filtration control additives are required when Ca++ and Mg++ solubility is reduced
Foaming tendency is lessened
Mud is generally more stable
Saturated salt muds will normally contain soluble calcium due to the formations penetrated and the type of makeup water used. Also, the sodium ions from the salt will undergo a base exchange and release calcium ions from the clay platelets, thereby contributing to the free calcium. Generally, the presence of calcium does not produce detrimental effects on the mud; except when the pH is increased beyond 12.0 and then the fluid loss will be difficult to control. Foaming is generally restricted to surface foam and is not troublesome unless aggravated by mechanical agitation. The degree of foaming may sometimes be decreased by increasing the alkalinity of the mud (Pm). A De-foaming agent may be necessary. Unless Mg++ sensitive additives are used, a Saturated Salt Mud is less prone to foam and air cut with a
9.5 - 10 pH. The temperature limitation of Saturated Salt Muds is around 250°F and is normally dictated by the filtration control additive used. Ca++ and Mg++ hardness do not adversely affect filtration control in Saturated Salt Muds when using starch; however. Usually there are no problems associated with saturated salt mud conversions. Conversion can be accomplished in two circulations. The mixing hopper discharge should be located away from the main pump suctions to reduce foaming and air cutting. When a freshwater mud is to be converted to a saturated salt mud, it is desirable to use as much of the old mud as possible. The amount of salt required to saturate the system should be calculated and then added through the hopper. A saturated salt mud will generally weight 75 pcf without weight material addition. Next, a fluid loss additive is added through the hopper while the mud is circulated. Starch is generally used for fluid loss control and as a supplementary viscosifier. Normally, 10 - 14 lb/bbl starch will be required to obtain a fluid loss of less than 3 cc/30 minutes. If a higher density is required, Barite which will be use. When weighting up with Barite, a Lignosulphonate Deflocculant is ecommended to avoid excessive viscosity and high gel strengths as contingency.

#### (Formulation & Properties)

# 12 1/4” Hole Section Mud Material Requirement

# 8 3/8” Hole Section: (±3313m- ±4313m)
After cementing the 9 5/8” inch casing and confirmation of its proper cementing, The
8 3/8“ section will be drilled from casing shoe ±3313mt to an estimated section TD of 4313 mt. through Asmari-Pabdeh and Ilam formation with Oil base mud (Salt Water /  Inhibited Salt Water / Inhibited Polymer Mud system) necessitating a minimum requirement of 70 pcf to 90 pcf based on nearby well data. The Asmari reservoir of Gachsaran oil field is predominantly composed of carbonates; limestones are most common in the formation with alternative layers of dolomite, dolomitic limestone in the lower to upper parts. The anhydrites within the reservoir are typically thin and limited areal extent in the upper part of the formation.
The Pabdeh formation is mainly composed of grey limestone and shaly and dark shaly Limestone. The Gurpi formation is consist of gray, limestone and shaly dark Brown –brownish, slightly argillaceous micritic limestone
It is necessary to adjust mud weight and mud properties as hole condition dictate. Some tight hole, well flow , severe losses and low ROP maybe experienced in this hole section. The drilling fluid engineer will advise the drilling supervisor of any extended circulation or sweep
Requirement . It uses clarified viscosifier to provide viscosity and carrying capacity and starch to reduce mud filtrate.
In case of using water base mud , and having problem with Marl and Shale layer 5-7 wt. % of KCl and 3-5 vol. % of Glycol , should be added to system to minimize associated problem.
Itis necessary to adjust mud weight and mud properties as hole condition dictate. Some tight hole, well flow , severe losses and low ROP maybe experienced in this hole section. The drilling fluid engineer will advise the drilling supervisor of any extended circulation or sweep requirement. It uses clarified viscosifier to provide viscosity and carrying capacity and starch to reduce mud filtrate.
Interval Mud Discussion:
The water-based KCL Polymer system provides effective inhibition when drilling reactive shales
through Below mechanism:
Potassium Chloride provides a source of Potassium ions, which are small enough to fit between the clay platelets without distorting the shale lattice. The Potassium ions are adsorbed on the exchangeable cation sites in the shale lattice and this holds the platelets together, which helps to minimize clay and  shale hydration,  swelling and  dispersion. A low solids, non-dispersed Salt/KCl/Glycol Polymer drilling ﬂuid is selected for drilling this section. This system is used primarily to drill moderately reactive shales. It can be used effectively at temperatures up to 275˚ F – 300˚
Formulation & Properties

# 8 3/8” Hole Section Mud Material Requirement

# 6” Hole Section: (±4313m- ±5057m)
After cementing the7 inch liner and confirmation of its proper cementing, The 6“ section will be drilled through Sarvak formation from liner shoe to an estimated section TD ±5057 mt. with  Oil Base Mud system necessitating a minimum requirement of 79 pcf to 90 pcf based on nearby well data.
The Bangestan group consists of gray micritic limestone mostly argillaceous, rarely pyritic.
It is necessary to adjust mud weight and mud properties as hole condition dictate. Some tight hole, severe losses and low ROP maybe experienced in this hole section. The drilling fluid engineer will advise the drilling supervisor of any extended circulation or sweep requirement. It uses clarified viscosifier to provide viscosity and carrying capacity and starch to reduce mud filtrate.
In case of using water base mud , and having problem with Marl and Shale layer 5-7 wt. % of KCl and 3-5 vol. % of Glycol , should be added to system to minimize associated problem.
Itis necessary to adjust mud weight and mud properties as hole condition dictate. Some tight hole, well flow , severe losses and low ROP maybe experienced in this hole section. The drilling fluid engineer will advise the drilling supervisor of any extended circulation or sweep requirement. It uses clarified viscosifier to provide viscosity and carrying capacity and starch to reduce mud filtrate.
Formulation & Properties ( Oil Base )

# 6” Hole Section Mud Material Requirement
Interval Mud Discussion:
The water-based KCL Polymer system provides effective inhibition when drilling reactive shales
through Below mechanism:
Potassium Chloride provides a source of Potassium ions, which are small enough to fit between the clay platelets without distorting the shale lattice. The Potassium ions are adsorbed on the exchangeable cation sites in the shale lattice and this holds the platelets together, which helps to minimize clay and  shale hydration,  swelling and  dispersion. A low solids, non-dispersed Salt/KCl/Glycol Polymer drilling ﬂuid is selected for drilling this section. This system is used primarily to drill moderately reactive shales. It can be used effectively at temperatures up to 275˚ F – 300˚

# COMPLETION FLUID:
The completion fluid for this section will be fresh water treated with a scavenger, inhibitor and biocide.
The performance requirements designed for the completion fluid system is as below:
Recovered permeability: ≥90%
Corrosion rate: ＜0.076mm/a
Diameter of solid particle: ≤2μm

#### Solids-Free NaCl Fluid Systems
This fluid is recommended to make from fresh water or is solutions made with water and the
addition of one or more electrolytes. These fluids do not contain either suspended particles or viscosifiers, which mean neither filtration control nor viscosity control, are provided. Some NaCl is corrosive and when corrosion inhibitors are required, compatibility studies should be performed. Some brine is toxic and precautions should be taken to prevent contact with unprotected skin. Brine solutions can be prepared to give good inhibition of clays or shales in producing formations. In addition, common contaminants do not affect the brines.
Salt solutions were formerly considered too corrosive to be used as work-over or completion fluids or as acker fluids. The corrosion problem can be solved by adjusting the pH of the solution to above 10.5 - 11; however, pH measurements may be less important than measuring and controlling the p-alkalinity of the filtrate; this value should be kept above 1 cc. Lime be used for pH control. Adjustment of pH, or alkalinity, does not necessarily ensure the solution to be corrosion resistant. It may be necessary to use a corrosion inhibitor to achieve lower corrosion rates. In some cases, an oxygen scavenger might be used in conjunction with a filming amine inhibitor.

#### Corrosion Control
Corrosion control in completion fluids is important to protect tubular goods and equipment.
Corrosion can be limited by controlling the fluid pH at the neutral or alkaline level, and treating out dissolved oxygen.  In  severe  environments  such  as  high temperature or contamination with acid gases, the addition of filming amines can limit corrosion to acceptable levels.
The completion fluid for this section will be Local water treated with a scavenger, and inhibitor. Pit management will be a key in the successful completion of this interval and sufficient time for planning and preparation should be allowed.
All valves should be checked for leakage before hand and defects identified to be reported and
rectified by drilling contractor.
The rig pumps are to displace all clean up pills as well as the NACL at 69 pcf. Prepare spacers and wash pills as per program in the tanks. Ensure that sufficient spacer is prepared to account for any dead tanks volume.
Prepare all inhibited NACL before starting the displacement process. After preparing the  brine
should be filtered through filtration unit and store in a clean pit before displacement.

#### Filtration Process:
Filtration provides clean fluids that will prevent damage to the formation, the reservoir and its permeability. It does this by removal of solids and particulates from the fluid that may otherwise block the open space within the rock formation containing the hydrocarbon fluid within the production zone.
Any solids and contaminates in the completion fluid will reduce its effectiveness. An efficiently filtered and completely solid free completion fluid will add value to both the productivity and the dependability of the well in the long term.
dual pod filtration cartridge unit is recommended for filtering brines and produced water in completion, stimulation, and work over operations. The pods are connected by a manifold, providing staged filtration capability. Staged filtration utilizes cartridge filters with different ratings to maximize filtration efficiency. Cartridge filtration is designed for use with fluids containing a low percent by volume of suspended solids. Cartridge filtration is not economic when fluids are contaminated with oil or other substances.

#### Displacement Process:
It is recommended to circulate and condition the mud prior to displacement and to spot in cased hole to conditioned mud or a solids-free fluid loss pill. Circulate and condition the mud as needed prior to pumping the clean out pills to optimum displacement properties).

#### Completion fluid
The consumption amount of lime ( lb/bbl) is based on completion fluid PH, That it must not be
less than 8.5.
1. Fill the tanks with the required volume of Drill water.
2. Add ±125 lb/bbl NACL to the Drill water tank to get 75 pcf brine. (Mud Weight should
be monitored while adding Nacl)
Note: Do not use hopper after adding O2 scavenger and H2S Scavenger
3. Add ± 2 – 3 lb/bbl of Lime for maintaining alkalinity.
4. Filterate the compelition fluid and run the below testes: -Turbidity <30 NTU - TSS <30 mg/lit
Note:
For fluid returning from the well: Turbidity should be less than 150 NTU.
5. 1 Hour befor pumping in the well add below items
6. Add 0.4 gal/bbl (1%vol) of BRINE-CORE (Corrosion inhibitor)
7. Add ± 0.2 gal/bbl of H2S SCAV P
8. Add ± 0.2 gal/bbl of OX SCAV P (to eliminate dissolved oxygen as a source of corrosion)
Note1:
OX SCAV P addition should be done at the last stage just before Brine displacement in the hole.
It should be mixed slowly to reduce the amount of air entrained in the brine and the amount of
oxygen which may be incorporated into the system, also use of the mixing hopper and agitation
of the completion fluid by surface equipment should be minimized.
Note 2: Before pumping the completion fluids should pump the wash pill and viscous pill.

#### RIG CLEAN UP CHECK LIST
Areas to clean.
Surface pits.
Clean the suction, return, settling, and reserve pits.
Clean the sand traps.
Clean the ditches and troughs.
Clean the trip tank.
Clean the shaker area including all solids equipment and lines.
Clean the mixing hoppers.
Clean the cement unit.
Clean any other pits or equipment that the completion fluid may contact.
Cycle all valves in mixing system.

#### Items to flush out.
All mud pumps and suction lines.
All centrifuges and lines.
Chemical and weighting mixing lines in contact with the completion fluid.
Lines from the pit room to the trip tank .
Lines from the rig floor to the trip tank .
Choke, choke manifold and kill lines.
Standpipes.
Degassing and solids control equipment.
Lines to the cement unit and/or other pumping equipment.
Casings fill up line.
Lines to and from the filtration line.
Take on and return lines to and from the boat.
Any other lines that the completion fluid may contact.

#### Displacement Procedure
Run bit and dual or tandem scrapers.
Circulate and condition mud. Reduce funnel viscosity as much as possible while maintaining adequate rheological properties to clean hole and prevent settling of solids. Maintain critical annular velocity to assure that liner tops are thoroughly cleaned prior to displacement.
Rig up equipment for displacement of completion fluid. All tanks, circulating lines, and pumps to be used in the displacement should be cleared of residual mud.
Insure sufficient space is available to store displaced mud

#### Formulation & Properties

# Water based Mud Instead of Oil base mud: (KLA-GARD)
There’s rarely been much argument about oil-base muds being excellent shale inhibitors. But there is a growing concern about their environmental impact in many areas of the world. There’s also not much argument that while water-base drilling fluids are more friendly, environmentally speaking, they don’t measure up to oil-base systems in shale inhibition. With the introduction of KLA-GARD
Shale stabilizer and its system additives, M-I Drilling Fluids has taken a big step toward combining the performance of oil-base systems and the environmental neutrality of water-base systems. As if that weren’t enough, the KLA-GARD system offers related benefits that make it a cost-effective solution as well.
The system provides a degree of shale inhibition approaching that of oil-base systems, without the associated clean-up and disposal costs.
KLA-GARD’s excellent inhibition gives you cost-cutting benefits: improved solids-removal efficiency, reduced effect of drill solids on viscosity and minimization of excessive dilution rates (Below Figure).
With KLA-GARD, you get one product that takes changing downhole conditions in stride: temperatures in excess of 400°F (204°C); contaminants such as cement, CO2 and hardness; high shear rates; and changing pH levels.
KLA-GARD’s superior inhibition delivers wellbore stability and a gauge hole;
less lost time on problems Related to tight hole, reaming and bit-balling ( below Figure); improved wireline log data quality; reduced stuck pipe; less cement consumption and better-set casing; and improved isolation of producing formations.
The system features improved health and safety aspects compared to oil-base systems.
M-I Drilling Fluids has engineered a variety of polymeric additives that improve the inhibitive and nondispersive aspects of the KLA-GARD system. These polymeric products optimize wellbore stability and improve cuttings integrity. All the products in the KLA -GARD system work to prevent the hydration of clays. The table below lists the common materials in the system and their functions. Although there is a wide latitude for product usage, the initial five additives listed in the table are required to provide the needed inhibitive characteristics. Since KLA-GARD has a wide range of compatibility with other polymers, there is a broad selection of materials that may be chosen for use in this system. We recommend that all deflocculants be avoided since they tend to negate the inhibitive benefits of the system.
Once it’s added to a water-base mud system, KLA-GARD’s unique, multifunctional molecule reacts with the active sites present on clay mineral platelets. The KLA-GARD molecule then electrostatically binds these platelets together, thereby diminishing the clay’s tendency to absorb water from its aqueous environment. This action limits the ability of water sensitive shales, particularly those Containing significant concentrations of Smectite, to hydrate and swell when exposed to water-base fluids ( below Figure).
By suppressing hydration, and preventing subsequent swelling of clay materials, KLA-GARD produces a stable wellbore, good cuttings integrity, reduced bit-balling tendencies and an overall stable mud system ( below Figure). It also minimizes situations such as excessive dilution to control drilled solids, increased torque and drag, high swab and surge pressures, and bottom-hole assembly balling.
The ability of a drilling fluid inhibitor to minimize formation damage in the productive zone is of utmost importance. Return permeability testing with KLA-GARD was carried out using Berea sandstone cores. A no damaging reference fluid, 3 percent KCl brine, was used for comparison against tap water treated with 6 ppb (1.7 percent) KLA-GARD. The following chart (Figure 7) shows the results of this test. As illustrated by the return permeability testing performed, KLA-GARD did not significantly reduce the return permeability of the Berea sandstone. The difference in percent return values shown in the chart is within experimental
error. KLA-GARD’s unique chemistry in aqueous fluids is responsible for its non-damaging nature.

# Appendix

# OBM SYSTEM
DISPLACEMENT PROCEDURE:
Dress the shakers with new screens. Initially use coarse screens on one or two of the primary shakers. Coarse screens will be necessary for the first 2-3 circulations due to potential  plugging  by  the  water  /oil  mud  interface  or water-wet  solids  during  initial displacement.
The shaker screens could be conditioned oil wet by base oil prior to displacement.
Prepare a 50 bbls of base oil as a spacer prior the displacement from WBM to OBM. Pump the base oil spacer, and then continue displace with OBM mud system. Mud Engineer should monitor on the shale shaker and check the fluid coming out from hole to minimize contamination and damage to the environment. Once base fluid spacer comes out from hole, the lines can be switched to active systems.
After all of the above, keep bit on bottom and circulate the wellbore volume with a constant pump rate as high as possible. Any restrictions on disposal of SW at surface should be  given.  Rotation and  reciprocation  of  the drill string are recommended  to further minimize intermingling of the two systems.
Any severely contaminated interface fluids to be discarded. Continue circulating after returns of OBM have been confirmed. It may be necessary to periodically clean the shaker screens with base oil and soft brush during the first one or two circulations to remove water-wet solids. As circulation continues, treat for any water base mud and/or water wet solids
contamination. Commence drilling once the OBM meets the required specifications and the mud engineer will confirm it.
After 3-4 circulations, change the coarser screens with the fine mesh screens to minimize solids content in the system but still able to handle OBM at the maximum circulation rate without any excessive mud lost on shale shakers.

#### ENGINEERING EMPHASIS:
Rheological and solid phase
It is hard to determine absolutely corrected rheological, such as plastic viscosity, yield value and shear force. There are many factors influencing on these values i.e. temperature, mud type, size of solid particles and concentration, oil-water ratio, brine concentration and quality of  emulsion. Whether the characteristics are proper is determined by downhole condition at that time. For example, in large hole or in high inclination wells, high yield value and shear force must be maintained to ensure enough carrying capacity. But even under the same specific gravity, when drilling a smaller hole size, these properties are no longer mandatory.
Generally when pressure increases in Saraline 98 v, the mud becomes thick, thus its plastic
viscosity and yield value are lower than that of water base drilling fluid of same density in application. If minimum value of rheological is maintained, if the ground barium sulfate is not settling down in a (open neck flask) jar at ambient temperature, this is because of influence of pressure on oil, the ground barium sulfate will not be settled down in the wellbore. But when this rule is used, attention shall be paid. If downhole temperature is high, because of temperature, the oil consistency will decrease, the contrary situation will appear because of the combined influence of pressure and temperature. This shall be determined according to practical situations. Sometimes formation gas invades into drilling fluid, dissolves in the mud system which will result in viscosity decrease and induce the settling down of ground barium sulfate, which is not often seen.
The general rules of controlling rheological and solid phase are given below:
Plastic viscosity is maintained as low as possible to obtain maximum drilling rate. At a time interval of the same specific gravity, if plastic viscosity increases gradually, it indicates that discontinous phase increase due to:
the increasing of fluid loss additive;
low specific gravity of drilling cuttings;
Creation of ultra-micro solids.
Contamination of water .
Determine the yield value and shear force according to the needs of 3 aspects below:
Enough thixotropic (shear force) is maintained to suspend the weighting
materials and provide enough carrying capacity.
Decrease the annulus pressure as much as possible, optimize hydraulic power of drill bit, and reduce equivalent circulating density in order to obtain maximum flow rate during drilling.
For the oil base mud of given specific gravity, because of different needs of the system, the requirement of solid phase content is different, generally, the less of solid phase content is better for general application in drilling. The addition of bridging  agent i.e.  Calcium Carbonate  will impact  on  the increase  of LGS content. But since it is necessary to add Calcium Carbonate in the system, the increase of LGS content is still tolerable as long as the drilled solids content is minimized through the optimum use of solid control equipment.

#### Alkalinity (Pom)
In fact, the detection of alkalinity in oil base mud is to measure the residual lime content in  its  system.  Pom  value  must  be  maintained  within  the  range  of 1.5~2.5ml  (0.1N H2SO4). Lime plays a decisive rule for the succession of oil base mud, lime becomes more important with the increase of downhole temperature, and the functions of lime include:
pH of dispersed water phase is kept within the range of alkalinity, optimal performance of emulsifier and treating agent is obtained within alkalinity range.
Because proper alkalinity is kept, high temperature qualitative and emulsion
stability can be achieved.
When oil base mud is used in drilling, H2S and CO2 will appear, by which pH in
dispersed water phase will be reduced, solubility of the emulsifier will be changed  to damage  the rheological behavior. Lime is not only be used as contamination indicator of acid gas (alkalinity consumes  quickly)  but  it  can  be used  as  a  method  to  eliminate  and  prevent  these  2

#### contaminations (cut off gas agent).
a. Because the electrolyte has the property of electro-ionization (CaCl2), lime is put into the mud system to maintain the alkalinity for preventing electro-ionization.
Lime has the tendency of promoting water wetting, therefore, excessive lime is hazardous, excessive alkalinity will induce the increase of rheological value when lime is added, it is appropriate to add wetting retrograding agent, lime consumes with circulating time and temperature, in a new and unstable mud system, lime consumes very fast. When the mud system tends stable its consumption reduces. It is very necessary and important to detect the alkalinity every day and keep in appropriate range, Pom increase 0.2ml by adding lime to the ratio of 1lb/bbl of mud volume.

#### CaCl2 content
If an oil base mud is used, of which its activity is controlled, CaCl2 content shall be detected
with titration method, and maintained at desired range. Be aware not to have excessive Water Phase Salinity in the system as it will break the emulsion of oil-water phase when it reaches its saturation point.

#### HTHP fluid loss
For a standard oil base mud, generally its HTHP fluid loss is 3~4ml. It must be all oil. If this
value increases evenly, it shows that the drilling fluid shall be treated by using emulsifier or assisting emulsifier. If there is water in filtrate, a wetting agent is added to enhance emulsification. Water producing is not allowed for a long period. HTHP fluid loss is less than 10ml in conventional COSL mud system. In high permeable formation, it is proposed that fluid loss is controlled to lower level to prevent stuck pipe. For RELAXED mud system, there is no control of HTHP fluid loss, even if there is water in filtrate, which is the characteristics of the system, it is designed for the highest drilling rate.

#### Electric stability
Electric stability is to measure the emulsifying level of water in continuous oil phase, oil is not
conductive, electric current takes place on electrode between joints. It occurs when emulsified water beads are linked together (accumulation) to create a continuous
electric bridge (circuit). The more stable the emulsion is, the higher voltage will be needed to create a bridge for demulsifying and combining the water beads. There are factors influencing the changes of electric stability values:
Electrolyte concentration
Conductivity of water increases with the raising of electrolyte concentration, thus the increase of electrolyte has temporary function of reducing electric stability.
Water content
When dispersed water phase increases, the average distance between water beads reduces (they are compressed closely). So that water beads are accumulated obviously to create a bridge easily, resulting in the decrease of electrical stability.
Water wetting solid
Severity of water wetting solid has negative influence on stability values of emulsion. For conductivity, fully water wetting solids play a role of water beads in fact, because the accumulation of water wetting solids is equal to big water beads, resulting the decrease of electrical stability.
Emulsion
In a newly prepared unstable system, the size of a water bead is larger, which will obviously influence on emulsion stability, the size of water beads and concentration of emulsion govern the stability of emulsion.
Measuring the Temperature of Emulsion Stability
The value of emulsion stability is an important parameter, generally its absolute value is not used, that is every system has its own special conditions, by which electric stability value is established. If the electric stability reading is 500 for a system, its stability is the same as that of the other system of   2000 reading, the matter concerned is that
attention shall be paid on the values of various systems and their variation trends. In the routine stability inspection, the system stability changes are known through its value variation. The reason of the changes is explained from other inspections and analysis, and handles it in time.

#### Adjustment of Oil-water Ratio
Oil-water ratio is a proportional correlation of oil-water component in emulsion, which is
expressed with the percentage of fluid component. Oil-water ratio is very important to newly established drilling fluids, by which the initial viscosity and HTHP fluid loss are determined for the system. When cuttings enter the system, the volumetric percentage of fluid components will decrease. When solid increases, and volumetric percentage of water remains unchanged, it indicates that water increases in oil-water ratio, of which the rheological reading will be higher than the rheological reading increase due to the increase of solids. Mud engineers control the viscosity of liquid phase by keeping a stabilized oil-water ratio. When a great number of solids enter into stabilized emulsion, oil-water will also be increased.

# LOSS CONTROL PROCEDURE:
Loss of fluid returns will lower the hydrostatic head of the drilling fluid in the wellbore, thereby
inducing a kick. The influx fluid will then flow to the surface or into the zone of lower pressure. Lost circulation can occur in naturally occurring fractured, vuggy, cavernous, sub-normally pressured or pressure depleted formations. Induced losses can occur from mechanical fracturing due to pressure surges while breaking circulation. In all cases of lost circulation, attempts should be made to keep the hole full. The hole can be filled with either light drilling fluid or water. A record of the amount of fluid pumped should be made.
The concentration of LCM will vary according to losses. In the event of seepage losses, treat system with a finer grade of LCM at 20 – 30 Kg/m³. In the event of moderate to high rate of well bore loss, prepare pills at different graded concentrations and spot over thief zone. The concentration may vary between 18 to 70 lb/bbl. In order to avoid  LCM plugging MWD tools a circulation sub should be installed in the drill string. The MWD engineer is to advise on the size and concentration of LCM that can be pumped through MWD Tools. Ensure that the drilling displace the LCM pill out of the string prior to shutting down the mud pumps.
Important Note: Please note below concentration and recommended materials may be change with same materials on rig site.
In case of having circulation losses:

#### Losses less than 10 bbls/hr:
Active system to be loaded with 10 lb/bbl of Fiber Fine. Losses 10- 40 bbls/hr:
Active mud to be loaded with 15- 20 lb/bbl of Fiber Medium.
Sweep the hole frequently with 50 bbls high viscous pill contains;
15 lb/bbl Mica Medium - Corse.
10 lb/bbl Walnut Shells Medium -Fine.
10 lb/bbl Oyster Shell Fine. Losses 40 – 100 bbl/hr:
Stop Drilling.
Pull out string above the loss zone
Spot 100 bbls pill contains;
30 lb/bbl Fiber coarse.
30 lb/bbl Walnut Fine.
20 lb/bbl Mica Med.
Repeat the previous pill minimum of two times. Losses more than 100 bbls:
Up to company procedure, may be squeeze 50 bbls of Cement squeeze.

#### Mixing LCM Pills
The amount of LCM that can be added to a mud depends very much on the mud properties. High
gels and YP will help keep the material in suspension. Since LCM is generally of low gradient, excess material tends to float on top if too much is added. The following procedure may prove useful for mixing LCM pills and avoiding the problem of flotation.
ENSURE the pill has enough viscosity to keep the low gradient material in suspension before addition of LCM. ADD appropriate viscosifier if required.
ADD the material in stages e g. 5, 10, 15, 20 etc. ppb.
STOP after desired concentration has been reached, or when it is observed that the material cannot be held in suspension
If a higher LCM content is desired, LEAVE the pill to soak for a period of time and then TRY ADDING more material.

#### LCM Pill Spotting Procedure
After spotting LCM pill, pull the bit above the calculated top of the pill. Wait 30minutes and monitor the annulus.
After 30 minutes, attempt to fill the annulus, if not already full. If the hole can be filled, close the BOP and squeeze 10 bbls of LCM pill into the formation without exceeding 200 psi.
If the hole remains stable, continue to drill ahead.
Should the LCM pill fail to reduce the losses or the hole cannot be filled, then mix and spot another 50 bbls of LCM pill.
Attempt to fill the annulus. If successful, close the BOP and squeeze 20 bbls of LCM pill into the formation without exceeding 200 psi. If a squeeze pressure develops, hold the pressure for 1 hour before staging the drill string back to bottom.
Notes:
All time hole must be full, transfer mud to trip tank and asked driller to fill hole from trip tank.
All LCM pills must be thoroughly mixed and homogenised before being pumped.
When pumping an LCM pill through a bit with nozzle smaller than 18/64, DO NOT USED LCM Medium and Coarse sizes.
Remove filter screens from the drill pipe and if necessary from the mud pump suction lines.
This is particularly true if the mud density is high, 14 lb/gal or greater. Fine loss circulation material which does not adsorb a lot of water should be used in weighted mud.

# GUIDELINE FOR FIELD ENGINEERS FOR SHALE INHIBITION:
Shale Hydration takes two forms in water-sensitive shales: surface and osmotic adsorption. Surface hydration occurs when a small volume of water is strongly adsorbed onto the planar surfaces of the clays which causes little softening or swelling, but can lead to excessive stresses if the swelling is confined.
Osmotic swelling occurs when a large volume of weakly held water is attracted to the clay surfaces by electrostatic forces. Osmotic swelling causes softening and significant swelling as the adjacent clay layers hydrate water and expand. Osmostic swelling does not generate excessive stresses, even when confined, and can be substantially reduced if Extremely difficult drilling conditions have led to more systematic approaches to analysing wellbore instabilities. One such approach that can be used as a guideline for the mud engineer involves three basic steps:
Monitor and analyse the fundamental failure mechanism.
Determine and understand the factors governing this failure mechanism.
Model the problem considering impact of proposed changes.

#### MONITOR AND ANALYZE THE FAILURE MECHANISM
Monitoring of data and events on the rig is the first step of the process and involves:
Collection, organization and processing of drilling data. Drilling data such as Rate of Penetration (ROP), Revolutions per Minute (RPM), Weight-on-Bit (WOB), Bottom-Hole Assembly (BHA), torque, over pull Trip In Hole (TIH) and Pull Out Of Hole (POOH), swab and surge, flow rate, mud weight, mud Rehology , etc. should be collected, organized and analyzed on a continual basis and compared to the symptoms of wellbore stability being observed. This will help evaluate performance and establish trends or any deviations and measure the effectiveness of treatments and changes.
Formation characterization. The standard procedure in drilling operations is to apply the knowledge
gained  from previous wells to subsequent wells drilled in similar geologic regions.
Wellbore-instability
investigation requires evaluation of shales during the drilling process. Since rig site shale testing is limited
due to equipment and time limitations, most evaluations are performed in a properly equipped laboratory.
Laboratory tests are conducted to evaluate shale swelling, dispersibility, cation exchange capacity, hydration capacity, colloidal content, capillary suction time, shale hardness tests and mud compatibility properties.
A number of methods have been used to perform rig site tests. These include tests as simple as the methylene blue test (CEC) measurement of shale; shale hardness measurements; hot-rolled dispersion testing with various mud formulations and additives; and sophisticated analytical measurements of various clay properties. It is particularly important to try and determine the failure mechanism: swelling and softening or brittle spalling. Information from these tests, current shaker observations and mud logger
data are used to evaluate drilling fluid performance, adjust mechanical  drilling parameters and making casing design decisions. The primary options to counter shale problems at the rig site are:
Change the drilling fluid density.
Change to an oil- or synthetic-base system.
Change to a more inhibited water-base mud.
Reduce fluid loss to very low levels and increase filtrate viscosity.
Utilize pore-plugging additives, emulsified insoluble materials or plastering agents.
Adjust mechanical drilling parameters.
Evaluation and analysis of instability symptoms.
Instability warning signs such as the presence of excessive cavings on the shakers for a given ROP, fill on connections, tripping difficulties, torque, stuck pipe, etc. indicate that something is wrong down hole. The magnitude or volume of failed rock should be estimated and recorded with the other drilling parameters. The number and location of specific incidents should be recorded, such as pipe
sticking, fill or packing-off, reaming and re-drilling. All of this information can then be organized and correlated with time and depth to detect the location and quantify the severity of critical sections in the well.

#### DETERMINE AND UNDERSTAND FAILURE MECHANISM
All of the monitored and plotted parameters are then evaluated to identify the most
probable mechanism causing the instability. The most useful symptoms used to indicate the mechanism responsible for wellbore instability are:
Cavings analysis.
Tripping difficulties.
Drilling conditions.
Mud system analysis.
In-situ conditions.
These symptoms should be evaluated based on an interdisciplinary knowledge of the causes of wellbore
instability to determine the most likely failure mechanism.

#### MODEL AND CONSIDERING PROPOSED CHANGES
Once the monitoring and determination steps have produced parameters, organize and analyze
this data to obtain qualitative solutions and evaluate proposed changes. One good way to do this is through the use of a decision tree or flowchart approach to evaluate the possible failure mechanism and to identify the most promising remedies. After arriving at a proposed solution, a corrective measure should be applied andthe results used as feedback into the method and decision tree method.
A decision tree or flowchart,  such as  shown in Figure 9 for evaluating the cause of excessive cavings, provides a logical path for identification of the mechanism and a qualitative solution. Maintaining hole stability while drilling shale sections can be particularly troublesome. Simple solutions do not always exist, but good drilling practices combined with good mud practices are most often successful. Analysis of the mechanical stress/strain relationships has helped to develop the proper density requirements for hole stability.

# C.4. DIRECTIONAL DRILLING:

#### DRILLING FLUID PROPERTIES AND SELECTION
It is common knowledge among drilling engineers and drillers that borehole problems can be
considerably more severe in a directional hole than in a vertical well. The problems are magnified as the hole angle and horizontal displacement increases. Although most of these reactions are mechanical in nature, much can be done to alleviate them by proper selection and maintenance of the drilling fluid. For example, if a water-base fluid is being used, lubricants can be added to lower the coefficient of friction between the drill string and borehole or casing. Inhibiting salts can be added to reduce the interaction of the drilling fluid with the exposed formations, thereby improving borehole stability.
There are a number of drilling factors influenced by the drilling fluid, but the following are of primary concern in drilling a horizontal well.
Borehole instability
Hole cleaning
Torque and drag
Formation damage
Barite sag
Hydraulics
Borehole Instability
Borehole instability is one of the more costly, but relatively common problem associated with drilling oil and gas wells. Not only can it impede drilling, it can result in loss of the hole. The term normally conjures thoughts of borehole collapse with accompanying stuck pipe. This is one of the more critical reactions of borehole instability, but it can manifest itself in more subtle ways such as hole-fill, bridges, hole enlargement, or hole size reduction.
These reactions lead to other associated problems including increased torque and drag, logging difficulties, poor cement jobs, and increased drilling days, all of which add significantly to the drilling cost. It should be pointed out that the discussions to follow do not cover hole enlargement problems from weakly consolidated sands, or rubble zones that erode from the hydraulic action of the drilling fluid.

#### Stabilization
The swelling activity is controlled by adjusting the electrolyte content of the fluid to minimize expansion of the clays. Lime and gypsum-treated fluids have long been used for this purpose, but basically do not satisfy the inhibition needs of the more troublesome shales. The potassium ion is an effective swelling inhibitor and is used extensively for this purpose through the addition of potassium salts. The concentration of potassium utilized ranges from several hundred mg/L to over 60,000 mg/L. The most cost-effective potassium concentration, however, appears to be in the 3000 to 7000 mg/L range. In marine environments, seawater or seawater with additional sodium chloride, are good alternates to potassium. The tendency for the shale
to disperse or subdivide into discrete particles appears to be best controlled by the addition of an adsorptive, high molecular weight water-soluble polymer.
One of the more effective polymers for this purpose is the partially hydrolyzed poly acrylamide with molecular weight in excess of 15 million. These anionic polymers adsorb on to the surface of the cuttings and borehole wall to act as a binder or elastic coating to retard dispersion. Another approach to stabilizing the hard brittle shales that contain natural or induced micro fractures is the use of water-dispersible asphalt or asphaltines. The addition of these type materials appear to plug the micro-fractures, or perhaps even surface pore throats to retard further fluid invasion. This action has proven very effective in certain shales and can be applied in most water base fluids.

#### Hole Cleaning
Cleaning cuttings from a vertical hole has been covered extensively by numerous investigators. Hole cleaning in a vertical hole is essentially a matter of overcoming the slip velocity of the cuttings with sufficient annular velocity and carrying capacity of the drilling fluid. Although any velocity greater than the settling velocity of the largest cutting will theoretically lift all the cuttings to surface eventually, too low an annular velocity will lead to an undesirable high concentration of cuttings in the annulus. Experience has shown that cuttings concentrations more than 5% by volume cause tight hole or stuck pipe when circulation is stopped.

#### Cuttings Bed Formation
Radial slip velocity increases with increasing angle of inclination, forcing more cuttings to the low side of the annulus, which eventually results in the formation of a cuttings bed. reportedthat bed formation was dramatic in the 40° to 50° angle with the bed sliding downward against the flow, resulting in a very high cuttings concentration.
The fact that a cutting bed forms is a serious problem, but the instability of the bed in this critical angle of the well makes the problem even more severe. High torque and drag resulting from the high cutting concentration at the lower part of the angle can obviously result in stuck pipe or loss of circulation.

#### Hole Cleaning Sweeps
In static drill string concluded that high-density sweeps were more effective than high- density
high-viscosity sweeps based on field measurements. The higher viscosity of the latter caused flow diversion to the high side of the wellbore. Not surprisingly, high- viscosity sweeps also performed poorly. Also concluded that the best hole cleaning sweeps were high-density low viscosity sweeps, with a density 3 – 4 ppg higher than that of the drilling fluid. the following procedure is recommended:
Calculate sweep height in the vertical part of the annulus, and added hydrostatic head in the annulus.
Rotate at  80+  rpm  while  pumping the  sweep,  180+ rpm is preferred.  It is not recommended to pump a weighted sweep while sliding.
Keep pumping until the sweep is out of the hole. If pumping stops while the sweep is in the deviated hole, it falls out of the “jet stream” and re-deposits captured fines.
Avoid increasing the viscosity of the weighted sweep.
Plan to run 3 – 4 sweeps to achieve desired results when hole cleaning problems are indicated. One sweep will probably not be sufficient to remedy an existing situation.
Avoid checking for flow or closing the annulus with the weighted sweep in the drill pipe.
If desired for preventative maintenance: 1) schedule sweeps every 6 – 8 hours or 500 – 1000 feet (whichever comes first, unless the hole dictates greater frequency); barite/silt build- ups are dependent on time and footage: and 2) pump a sweep while circulating bottom up before tripping, and another once back on bottom.
concluded that high-density sweeps were more effective than high-viscosity sweeps.
They strongly advocated the use of sweep reports, which should be standard practice in any drilling fluids operation.

#### Short Tripping
Another technique that has proven helpful in controlling problems created by the cuttings bed in
the high-angle portion of the well is to make periodic short trips. Tripping the bit through the bed not only assures that the bottom hole assembly and bit can be pulled through it, but the action should agitate the bed to the point that a portion will slide down the hole and subsequently be picked up when circulation is commenced. The time intervals for these short trips will be determined by the torque and drag conditions that exist in any particular well. Lacking specific well history, a general rule of thumb is to short trip at least once for every 500 feet of new hole.

#### Drill String Rotation
The industry is in total agreement that drill string rotation improves hole cleaning, especially in
hole sizes less than 17 ½”. The general opinion in the industry is that the optimum drill string rotation rate is approximately 120 rpm. It is believed that the drill string rotation improves hole cleaning by mechanically disturbing the cuttings bed on the low side of the hole. There could also be effects due to skewing the velocity profile in the wellbore and the creation of Taylor Vortices. Encouraged the use of rotary steerable systems.

#### Turbulence
Bottom hole assembly design becomes important because the flow restrictions of some of the
components, such as the measurement-while-drilling tools or positive displacement motors, may not allow sufficient flow to reach turbulence in the annulus. Turbulence can, of course, be induced at some constant flow rate by decreasing the annular area. This may be more difficult to accomplish in a horizontal well because of limitations on the design of drill strings and tool assemblies. An increase in the effective viscosity of the drilling fluid will decrease the Reynolds Number, and thus increase the flow rate required to obtain turbulent flow. Thus, a lower effective viscosity fluid may be desirable in the horizontal well, but attention must also be given to cleaning the larger diameter portion of the upper hole or possible washed-out sections where it is impractical to maintain turbulent flow.
It is interesting to point out a basic fact between static fluid pressure and dynamic fluid pressure. Static fluid pressure is a function of true vertical depth, while dynamic fluid pressure, or ECD, is a function of measured depth. Thus, the ECD will continue to increase, albeit slowly, even after the hole becomes essentially horizontal. The fracture pressure could be reached if the hole was extended to sufficient depth and the fluid density is close to the fracture gradient.

#### Hole Cleaning Guidelines
The single most important factor related to hole cleaning in deviated wells is flow rate. During
directional drilling operations drilled cuttings will settle on the low side of the hole and form a stationary bed if insufficient annular fluid velocity is used. The critical flow rate required to prevent cuttings bed formation must be determined .
Typically few hole cleaning problems exist in vertical or horizontal sections. Most problems associated with hole cleaning are seen on deviated wells and occur in the 40 – 60 degree section where gravity effects can cause cuttings beds to slump down the hole.Typical flow rates to aim for in ERD wells:
When correctly designed, both laminar and turbulent flow regimes will effectively clean a deviated well. In general increasing the viscosity of a fluid in laminar flow will improve hole cleaning as will a reduction of the viscosity of a fluid in turbulent flow. It is important that one or other regime is selected and that the transition zone between the two is avoided.
Generally viscous fluids in laminar flow are preferred because:
It is possible to achieve higher cleaning capacity.
Viscous fluids give better transport in the near-vertical sections.
Viscous fluids have better suspension characteristics when circulation is stopped.
It is difficult to achieve “turbulent flow” except in small hole sizes.
Experience has shown that good drilling fluid rheological properties are extremely important to hole cleaning when drilling a high angle well. Studies show that the effects of drilling fluid rheological properties and annular flow regime are mutually dependent. In the laminar flow regime, increasing fluid viscosity will improve hole cleaning and this is particularly effective if the Yield Stress is high. In the turbulent regime, however, reducing fluid viscosity will help removing cuttings. Therefore the drilling fluid rheological properties should be designed to avoid the transitional flow regime. For hole sizes above 8 ½”, the annular flow is laminar under most circumstances. Therefore it is necessary to specify a minimum Yield Stress. The optimum level required is best established based on field data and experience.
A higher ROP requires a higher flow rate to clean the hole. It is good practice to drill the hole with a steady ROP and select the required flow  rate  for  hole  cleaning accordingly. Before making a connection, the hole should be circulated at the normal flow rate to clear the cuttings from around the BHA. Depending upon the hole angle and length of BHA, a circulation time of 5 to 10 minutes is often required.
Before tripping out, the hole should be circulated at the normal flow rate until the shakers are clean, and the drill pipe be rotated at maximum speed/reciprocated in the mean time. This may require up to 3 bottoms-ups, depending on the hole angle and hole size. Below are listed the recommended number of bottoms-up prior to tripping.

#### Torque and Drag
Overall friction can become so great in an extended-rech well or horizontal section that the drill
string can only be rotated with great difficulty. Needless to say, this condition is conducive to stuck pipe. Obviously, this coefficient of friction will be significantly affected by the lubricating properties of the drilling fluid.
Many of the causes of torque and drag are mechanical, while others are related to hole geometry. Several, however, can be directly attributed to the drilling fluid. Since wall contact with the drill string will be extremely high in a horizontal hole, it is imperative that the lubricating characteristics of the fluid be considered.

#### Formation Damage
The obvious reason for drilling a horizontal well is to expose more of the producing zone to the
wellbore for increased production. Thus, the importance of preventing formation damage during drilling and completion of the horizontal well is just as important as it is in its vertical counterpart.
In fact, it may be more important since the increased cost of drilling the horizontal well must show additional production for its justification. A 50% damage or permeability loss in a potential 500 bbl/day horizontal well represents a considerably greater loss in production than a 50% damage in a 100 bbl/day vertical hole through the same reservoir.
Sandstone production is by far the most susceptible reservoir rock to damage or permeability loss during drilling and completion operations. Though formation damage may be caused by poor drilling and completion practices, one of the primary causes is due to exposure to the drilling and completion fluid.
This loss, attributable to the fluid, can be caused by one or more of the following occurrences:
Particle transport from the drilling fluid into the production zone, subsequently plugging pore throats.
Fluid filtrate reacting with expandable clays in the rock to decrease pore throat diameters.
Particle movement within the permeable rock due to dispersion of clays and other minerals from quartz surfaces.
Wettability changes of the formation from exposure to the drilling fluid filtrate.Interaction of fluid filtrate with formation fluids to form water - insoluble precipitants. The effect of these actions on the permeability of sandstones has been the subject of a considerable investigation. In almost all cases, some damage is caused by the drilling and completion fluid. The primary objective is to limit this damage as much as possible. Consequently, selection of the drilling and completion fluid becomes an extremely important function in drilling the horizontal well.

#### Recommended Fluid Parameters
Velocity – One of the major obstacles to overcome in horizontal and ERD drilling is hole
cleaning. In vertical holes, cuttings have room to settle without causing problems. In horizontal wells, cuttings only have to settle 4+ inches to form a cuttings bed. Research and practical experience has shown that cuttings bed formation is analogous to sand dunes on an ocean beach. The bed moves in a wave fashion up the hole. If sufficient annular velocity is not present, the bed thickens until it reaches equilibrium, which usually occurs when turbulent flow conditions exist. With water, turbulent flow is easily obtained since viscosity is in the denominator of the turbulent flow equation, and water has a viscosity of Fluids  other than  water  require more pump output to approach turbulent  flowconditions.
Practical experience in other industries has proven that materials can be transported in water slurries if the fluid velocity is between 3 and 7 ft/sec.
Rheological Properties – Ideally one would want a true thixotropic fluid to drill horizontally.
In effect, two different conditions exist simultaneously. One occurs in the vertical portion of the hole where larger diameter casing may be set, or wash-outs in the open hole occur. In that case, a fluid having a high Yield Stress, or if the fluid is visco-elastic, the initial gel strength needs to be elevated. The opposite is needed in the horizontal section from a hole-cleaning point of view. Here one wants water for the reasons pointed out earlier. Compromises are the result. If casing is set into the zone of interest, or if formations up- hole are not a problem, then water may be possibly combined with occasional sweeps.
Surface Apparatus – Special attention must be placed on the solids removal equipment at the surface. Solids removal efficiency must be continually monitored so that unwanted particulate material is not retained in the fluid system that may negatively affect fluid   weight or filter cake quality, resulting in lost circulation or increased torque and drag. The cost of problems that may occur due to not doing this correctly may far outweigh the cost of equipment needed.

# C.5. HYDROGEN SULPHIDE GAS IN DRILLING FLUID:

#### Description of Hydrogen Sulphide Gas
Hydrogen sulphide is a colourless gas, with an offensive odour and a sweetish taste. It is soluble
in water, alcohol, oils, and many other solvents. It has a specific gravity of 1.1895 with reference to air. It is considered a weak acid, it is toxic to humans and corrosive to metals. Hydrogen sulphide can be dangerous to personnel on the surface as it is extremely toxic to human and even animal life, and is extremely corrosive to most metals as it can cause cracking of drill pipe and tubular goods, and destruction of testing tools and wire lines. When hydrogen sulphide enters the borehole during drilling, completion, or testing for hydrocarbons, it creates several very detrimental problems. These problems are encountered regardless of the source of the hydrogen sulphide. Hydrogen sulphide has created unsolved problems in the oil field.

#### Origin of Hydrogen Sulphide
During oil and gas operations, hydrogen sulphide can be found as a component of formation
gases, dissolved in water, hydrocarbons, or even liquid sulphur. Thermal degradation of organic materials and sulphate reducing bacteria (SRB) can create hydrogen sulphide along with other gases.

#### Problems Caused By Hydrogen Sulphide Gas Health and Safety of the Personnel
One of the main problems hydrogen sulphide causes is in respect to the health and safety and
safety of the personnel. A maximum  of eight hours  exposure to concentrations greater than 100 ppm H2S will cause hemorrhage and death. Concentrations above 600 ppm can be fatal in three to five minutes. Highly stressed, high strength steel can fail in a matter of minutes in the presence of 50 ppm H2S. At high pressure, as little as 0.1 ppm H2S can greatly reduce the time to failure of highly stressed, high strength steel. Relying solely on its  odour is not a good idea because at concentrations  above 100 ppm it deadens a person’s sense of smell within a few minutes. The pure gas is heavier than air and can collect in low areas such as pit rooms and accommodation. below Table shows the potential hazards hydrogen sulphide can cause to the personnel from short-term exposures. There are many historical cases to document the ill effects of hydrogen sulphide exposure.
The documented cases reported in Table 2 indicate that hydrogen sulphide is very toxic and it takes only a matter of minutes to affect unprotected workers.

#### Effects of hydrogen sulphide on Metals
Hydrogen sulphide mainly cause corrosion problems to drill strings, transport pipes, storage
tanks etc. Hydrogen sulphide causes sulphide stress cracking, hydrogen embrittlement and pitting corrosion in oil and gas operations. The corrosion of iron in the presence of hydrogen sulphide and water is dependent upon the dissociation of the hydrogen-sulphide molecule. Iron is oxidized to the ferrous form at the anode and hydrogen sulphide under- goes a two-step dissociation at the cathode. Tung et al22propose the following equilibrium reactions below.
At the anode:
Fe	→	Fe2+ + 2e
And at the cathode hydrogen is produced and either enters the steel or forms hydrogen gas and bubbles off:
If H2S is present:
2H+ + 2e-	→	H° + H°
If H2S is not present: H° + H°	→	H2
Hydrogen enters the steel first by adsorption onto the water to steel interface and then by being absorbed into the steel as hydrogen. The amount of hydrogen entry depends on the corrosion rate of the steel surface and the concentration of anions such as HS- that reduce the tendency to produce hydrogen gas (as shown in second equation above) and promotes the hydrogen (Ho) to enter the steel. pH also has an influence on amount of corrosion damage. Basically, the term “sulphides” used in oil and gas operations includes all three water-soluble species, H2S, HS- and S2-, which coexist in a sulphide-water system. Shown in the ionization chart for hydrogen sulphide in figure 1, it can be observed that molecular H2S predominates in the acidic range, where the pH is below 7. In the range of 7 to 12, monovalent HS- predominates and above pH 12, divalent S2- predominates.
The illustration in figure 1 indicates that the most important practice is that when H2S enters in alkaline mud, it reacts to form an alkaline sulphide, most often sodium sulphide.17 While elevated pH is a good way to keep H2S from causing problems under certain conditions, it does not remove it from the fluid and any drop in pH can create a significant hazard. This then brought about the advent of sulphide scavengers in the history of oil and gas operations. The only safe method for the total removal of hydrogen sulphide or soluble sulphides is with a sulphide scavenger.

[جدول 1]
Interval (mt.) | Hole Size (in) | Casing / Liner (in) | Formation | Mud Type | MW (pcf)
0-150 | 24 | 18-5/8 | Aghajari | Bentonite Mud /Salt Water/ Inhibited Salt Water / Inhibited Polymer Mud | 63-67
150- ±2677 | 17 | 13-3/8 | Mishan | Bentonite Mud Salt Saturated Polymer Mud | 64-96
±2700-  ±3313 | 12-1/4 | 9-5/8 | Gachsaran / Cap Rock | Salt Water / Inhibited Salt Water / Inhibited CaCO3 Polymer Mud | 130-137
±3313- ±4314 | 8-3/8 | 7 | Pabdeh | Oil Base Mud | 70-90
±4314- ±5057 | 6 | 5 | Sarvak | Oil Base Mud /  Inhibited Salt Water / Inhibited CaCO3 Polymer Mud | 79-90

[جدول 2]
Fluid Type | Hi Vis. , Bentonite Mud
 | Hole Size (in) |  |  | 26 | 
 | Casing / Liner Depth (mt.) |  |  | ±150 | 
Casing / Liner Size (in.) |  | 18 5/8” | 
 | 
FLUID PROPERTIES | FORMULATION
Property | Range | Product | Concentration(lb/bbl)
Mud weight (pcf) | 63 - 76 | Drill Water | As Needed
Viscosity(sec/qt) | 70-80 | Soda Ash | 0.5 - 1
PV (cp) | ALAP | Caustic Soda | 0.5 -1
YP (lbs/100 sq ft) | 30 - 40 | Bentonite | 30-40
pH | 9.5 – 10.5 | Lime | 1
Gel | 15 - 20 / 20 - 30 |  | 
Fluid Loss | NC |  | 
Chloride (mg/Lit) | < 5000 |  | 
Mud Materials | Water, Soda Ash , Caustic Soda , Bentonite
Contingency | Pipe Lax , Defoamer , Mica( F,M,C) , Walnut shell ( F,M,C) , Water Base Mud Lubricant , Citric Acid , Sodium Bicarbonate , Diesel , KCl , Salt , Barite , Lime , Diesel , XC-Polymer

[جدول 3]
Estimated Mud Material Requirement
Chemical | Required
Chemical | Quantity | Unit
Bentonite | 40 | MT
Soda Ash | 1.2 | 110 lb/Sx
Lime | 1 | 55 lb/Sx
Caustic Soda | 0.7 | 55 lb/Sx

[جدول 4]
Fluid Type |  | Bentonite Mud /Salt Water/ Inhibited Salt Water / Inhibited Polymer Mud | 
 | Hole Size (in.) |  |  | 17 1/2 | 
 | Casing / Liner Depth (mt.) |  |  | ±2677 | 
Casing / Liner Size (in.) | 13 3/8
 | 
FLUID PROPERTIES | FORMULATION
Property | Range | Product | Concentration (lb/bbl)
Mud weight (pcf) | 64-96 | Drill Water+ Waste Water | ----
Viscosity(sec/qt) | 40-50 | Caustic soda | 0.5-0.8
PV (cp) | ALAP | Soda ash | 0.5 - 1
YP (lbs/100 sq ft) | 14-20 | Salt ( Nacl ) | 70-120
pH | 9.5-10 | KCL (Contingency) | 7 - 10
Gel Strength(10s/10m) | 3-8 / 5-11 | Barite | 85
Fluid Loss cc/30' | NC / < 3 | Starch LV | 4 - 12
Chloride (mg/Lit) * | 72-188 | Pac LV | 2 - 4
KCl (%Wt.) | 3 - 5 | XC-Polymer | 0.2 - 0.5
Ca++ | < 800 | PHPA (Contingency) | 0.2 - 0.3
Mud Materials | Water, Soda Ash, Caustic Soda , Salt, Barite , Starch LV , Pac LV , XC.Polymer
Contingency | Pipe Lax, Defoamer , Mica( F,M,C) , Walnut shell ( F,M,C) , Water Base Mud Lubricant , KCl , PHPA , Water Base Mud Thinner , Citric Acid , Sodium Bicarbonate , Biocide

[جدول 5]
Estimated Mud Material Requirement
Chemical | Required
Chemical | Quantity | Unit
Soda Ash | 51 | 110 lb/Sx
Caustic Soda | 116 | 55 lb/Sx
Lime | 116 | 55 lb/Sx
Salt ( Nacl ) | 203 | MT
KCL (Contingency) | 15 | MT
Starch LV | 500 | 55 lb/Sx
Pac LV | 135 | 55 lb/Sx
XC-Polymer | 44 | 55 lb/Sx
Barite | 120 | MT
Bentonite | 150 | MT

[جدول 6]
Fluid Type | Salt Saturated Polymer Mud
 | Hole Size |  |  | 12 1/4” | 
 | Casing / Liner Depth (mt.) |  |  | ±3313 | 
Casing / Liner Size (in.) | 9 5/8”
 | 
FLUID PROPERTIES | FORMULATION
Property | Range | Product | Concentration (lb/bbl)
Mud weight (pcf) | 130-137 | Drill Water+ Waste Water | ----
Viscosity(sec/qt) | 45-55 | Caustic soda | 0.3-0.5
PV (cp) | ALAP | Soda ash | 0.5 - 1
YP (lbs/100 sq ft) | 14-20 | Salt ( Nacl ) | 125
pH | 9.5-10 | Starch LV | 12-14
Gel Strength(10s/10m) | 3-8 / 5-11 | Pac LV | 2 - 4
Fluid Loss cc/30' | < 3 | Barite | As Needed
Chloride (mg/Lit) * | 188 | XC-Polymer | 0.2 - 0.5
 |  | Ferro Bar | As Needed
 |  |  | 
Mud Materials | Water, Soda Ash, Caustic Soda , Salt, Barite , Starch LV , Pac LV , XC.Polymer
Contingency | Pipe Lax, Defoamer , Mica( F,M,C) , Walnut shell ( F,M,C) , Water Base Mud Lubricant , KCl , PHPA , Water Base Mud Thinner , Citric Acid , Sodium Bicarbonate , Biocide

[جدول 7]
Estimated Mud Material Requirement
Chemical | Required
Chemical | Quantity | Unit
Soda Ash | 32 | 110 lb/Sx
Caustic Soda | 19 | 55 lb/Sx
Lime | 32 | 55 lb/Sx
Salt ( Nacl ) | 190 | MT
Pac HV | 250 | MT
Starch | 550 | 55 lb/Sx
Pac LV | 250 | 55 lb/Sx
XC-Polymer | 44 | 55 lb/Sx
Barite | 970 | MT
Ferro Bar | 325 | MT

[جدول 8]
Fluid Type | Oil base mud | 
 | Hole Size | 8 3/8” | 
 | Casing / Liner Depth (mt.) | 4313 | 
Casing / Liner Size (in.) | 7”
 | FLUID PROPERTIES | FORMULATION | 
 | Property | Range | Product | Concentration (lb/bbl) | 
 |  | Product | Concentration (lb/bbl) | 
Mud weight (pcf) | 70-75 | Gasoil | 0.62 bbl/bbl
Viscosity(sec/qt) | 35-45 | F.L.C | 12 – 14 lbs./bbl.
PV (cp) | ALAP | Lime | 12 – 14 lbs./bbl
YP (lbs/100 sq ft) | 14 - 20 | Primary Emulsifier | 1 – 1.5 gal./bbl.
pH | 9.5-10 | Nacl / CaCl2 Brine | As Needed (73 pcf)
Gel Strength(10s/10m) | 4 - 8 / 8 -12 | Secondary Emulsifier | 0.5 – 0.8 gal./bbl.
Fluid Loss cc/30' | < 3 | O.B.M Viscosifier | 2 – 3 lbs./bbl.
Chloride (mg/Lit) * 1000 | 116-188 | CaCo3 | 90 lbs/bbl
Mud Materials | Gasoil , F.L.C , Lime , P.Emulsifier , CaCl2 , S.Emulsifier , O.B.M Viscosifier ,
Contingency | Pipe Lax, O.B.M Defoamer , Shell Fish ( F,M,C) ,CaCo3 ( F,M,C) , O.B.M Thinner , H2S Scavenger , O2 Scavenger , CaCo3

[جدول 9]
Estimated Mud Material Requirement
Chemical | Required
Chemical | Quantity | Unit
Diesel | 1800 | BBL
CaCl2 | 2200 | 110 lb/Sx
Lime | 600 | 55 lb/Sx
Drill Gel | 59 | 55 lb/Sx
Primary Emulsifier | 59 | Gal/ BBL
Secondary Emulsifier | 20 | Gal/ BBL
FLC | 504 | 55 lb/Sx
CaCo3 | 88 | MT

[جدول 10]
Fluid Type | Oil Base Mud
Hole Size | 6”
Casing / Liner Depth (mt.) | ±5057
 | Casing / Liner Size (in.) | 5” liner | 
 | FLUID PROPERTIES | FORMULATION | 
 | 
Property | Range | Product | Concentration
Mud weight (pcf) | 79-90 | Gasoil | 0.62 bbl/bbl
Viscosity(sec/qt) | 40 - 50 | F.L.C | 14 – 16 lbs./bbl.
Oil Water Ratio (%) | 90/10 | Lime | 14 – 16 lbs./bbl
PV (cp) | ALAP | Primary Emulsifier | 1 – 1.5 gal./bbl.
YP (lbs/100 sq ft) | 14 - 18 | Nacl / CaCl2 Brine | As Needed (73 pcf)
Gel Strength(10s/10m) | 2-5 / 4-7 | Secondary Emulsifier | 0.5 – 0.8 gal./bbl.
Alkanity | 4 - 5 | O.B.M Viscosifier | 2 – 3 lbs./bbl.
HP-HT Fluid Loss cc/30' | < 4 | CaCo3 | 90 lb/bbl
E.S (Volt) | 500 ≤ |  | 
Mud Materials | Gasoil , F.L.C , Lime , P.Emulsifier , CaCl2 , S.Emulsifier , O.B.M Viscosifier ,
Contingency | Pipe Lax, O.B.M Defoamer , Shell Fish ( F,M,C) ,CaCo3 ( F,M,C) , O.B.M Thinner , H2S Scavenger , O2 Scavenger , CaCo3

[جدول 11]
Estimated Mud Material Requirement
Chemical | Required
Chemical | Quantity | Unit
Diesel | 1200 | BBL
CaCl2 | 1800 | 110 lb/Sx
Lime | 500 | 55 lb/Sx
Drill Gel | 40 | 55 lb/Sx
Primary Emulsifier | 45 | Gal/ BBL
Secondary Emulsifier | 15 | Gal/ BBL
FLC | 400 | 55 lb/Sx
CaCo3 | 50 | MT

[جدول 12]
Additives | Additives Material | Function | Concentration | unit
Water | Water Base | Base Fluid | As required | lb/bbl
LIME | pH Control | pH Control | 2-3 | lb/bbl
NACL | NACL | Weighting Agent | 125 | lb/bbl
BRINE-COR (L) | Corrosion Inhibitor | Corrosion Inhibitor | 0.4 | Gal/bbl
H2S SCAV (L) | H2S Scavenger | H2S Scavenger | 0.2 | Gal/bbl
OX SCAV (L) | Oxygen Scavenger | Oxygen Scavenger | 0.2 | Gal/bbl

[جدول 13]
Fluid Type |  | Completion Fluid | 
FLUID PROPERTIES |  |  | FORMULATION | 
Property | Range |  | Product | Concentration
Weight (pcf) | ±75 | Drill Water | 
PH | 10-11 | Lime |  | 2 lbs./bbl.
 |  | NaCl |  | 125 lbs./bbl
 |  | Corrosion Inhibitor | 0.4 gal./bbl.
 |  | O₂ Scavenger | 0.2 gal./bbl.
 |  | H₂S Scavenger | 0.2 gal./bbl.
Mud Materials | Lime , NaCl , Corrosion Inhibitor , O₂ Scavenger , H₂S Scavenger

[جدول 14]
Hole Size | Typical Flow Rates
17 ½” | 1100 gpm minimum. Some rigs achieve 1250 – 1400 gpm.
12 ¼” | Aim for 1100 gpm (although 800 – 1000 gpm is typically achieved). If 1000 gpm is not achievable, ensure tripping procedures are in place for
8 ½” | Aim for 500 gpm.

[جدول 15]
Hole Angle, deg | 8 3/8” |  | 12 ¼” | 17 ½”
0 – 10 | 1.3 |  | 1.3 | 1.5
10 – 30 | 1.4 |  | 1.4 | 1.7
30 – 60 | 1.6 |  | 1.8 | 2.5
60+ | 1.7 | 2.0 |  | 3.0

[جدول 16]
Health effects from short-term exposure to hydrogen sulphide
 | Concentration (ppm) |  | Health Effect
 | 0.01 – 0.3 |  | Odour threshold
1 – 20 | Offensive odour, possible nausea, tearing of the eyes or headaches with prolonged exposure
20 – 50 | Nose, throat and long irritation; digestive upset and loss of appetite; sense of smell starts to become fatigued; acute conjunctivitis may occur (pain, tearing and light sensitivity)
100 – 200 | Severe nose, throat and long irritation; ability to smell odour completely disappears.
500 | Severe	lung	irritation,	excitement,	headache, dizziness, staggering, sudden collapse knockdown), unconsciousness and death within a few hours, loss of memory for the period of exposure (results in permanent brain damage if not rescued immediately).
500 – 1000 | Respiratory paralysis, irregular heart beat, collapse and death without rescue.
> 1000 | Rapid collapse and death
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Typical Drilling Fluid Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Typical Drilling Fluid Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Typical Drilling Fluid Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Typical Drilling Fluid Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Typical Drilling Fluid Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Typical Drilling Fluid Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Typical Drilling Fluid Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Typical Drilling Fluid Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Typical Drilling Fluid Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Typical Drilling Fluid Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Typical Drilling Fluid Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Typical Drilling Fluid Program |