# SOURCE: 6.Rigless Operation Program.docx

📄 فایل 168 از 214  |  6.Rigless Operation Program.docx
Siah Makan Field Development
Rigless Operation program (sample)
Perforation, High Volume Acidizing, Corrosion Logging and Well Testing Program

## Table of Contents
Section-1 Introduction and Executive Summary
Introduction
Ramshir development project includes 14 drilling well, 7 workover wells and 40 wells as rig less operation to be performed to increase production of the wells.

### Objective
The objectives of perforation, acidizing and well testing operations are:
1‐To perform perforations in Asmari formation and acid wash for more productivity 2- To perform well-testing including flow after flow and build-up test.
3‐High Volume Acidizing if required
4‐To evaluate Asmari formations productivity before and after acidizing
5‐Run PLT to determine production profile distribution from different Asmari sub layer 6‐Take down-hole and surface samples

### 1.3. Executive Summary
The activities in this booklet are prepared and proposed by this company as draft and shall not be considered as firm plan and final program will be revised according to specific scope of work. All activities are supported by QHSE and logistics team. The highlights of activities are as follows:
Perforation, High Volume Acidizing, Well Testing and PLT The following operation will be performed in sequence: Preparation
Mobilization
Displace completion fluid
In order to prepare the well for underbalance perforation, following steps should be carried out: Rig up and RIH CTU, displacing well completion brine with service water .

#### Operation
Perforation (If required)
Initial clean up and/or perforation tunnel acid spot
Hanging down hole memory gauge
Initial flow test
Injectivity test and/or perforation tunnel acid spot
Matrix acidizing
Post acid clean up
Main flow test
Main build-up test
Perform PLT
Take down hole sample and hand over the well. (If required)
Demobilization

#### Comingled Operation
Static pressure and PLT in Asmari
Hand over the well

## Section-2 Abbreviation and Nomenclatures

### 2.1Abbreviation
2.2. Nomenclatures
Client: NISOC
Contractor: PASARGAD
Qualified Personnel:  Any person in possession of a valid certificate of proficiency covering the activity being carried out.
Part Per Million (PPM): Concentration of a gas or liquid, in volume per million of volumes.
Rig Personnel: Means PASARGAD employees and any subcontracted employees under direct supervision of PASARGAD.
Restricted Areas: Areas prohibited to nonessential personnel.
Shall: Indicates a mandatory requirement,
Will: Indicates a future commitment

## Section-3 QHSE

### QHSE policy
Abide by applicable laws, regulations, standards and other relevant requirements;
Stress person-based and prevention first principles;
Encourage all the staff to take part in HSE work;
HSE management is regarded as one of the responsibilities of management of all levels；
Offer sufficient resources and conditions to carry out the requirements of the policy;
Communicate frankly with our employees, customers, subcontractors and other commercial partners;
Combine HSE risk management method including identification, assessment, control and emergency in our business course;
Give continual improvement of our HSE performance. For achieving these goals:
Utilizing a verifiable QHSE management system which incorporates all processes and activities;
Monitor, evaluate and improve our companies (core) processes and the HSEQ Management system itself;
Setting  objectives  for  improvement  which  are  measured,  valued  and  adjusted  if  necessary  (Key Performance Indicators);
Utilizing appropriate protective and work equipment, to protect people, assets and the environment in the best way possible;
Openly communicating with regard to our HSEQ performance;
Creating a culture in which our employees and contractors together with the other stakeholders dedicate themselves to achieving the goals which have been set with regard to HSEQ and their core tasks.

### HSE Plan
HSE management system plan is part of the corporation's higher level strategic plan. The corporation adopts system approach, risk management method in its plan of HSE management system so as to ensure the integrity of the management system against impact or damage. One of the evidences for the system plan is the corporation's HSE policy and the plan result meets the general requirement.
The corporation's HSE management system and the business divisions' management sub-systems are established in such logic thinking: as one part of the corporation's general strategy, the corporation's top management shall propose definite policy and commitment on HSE work; the above policy and commitment provide the basic framework for the establishment of specific HSE requirements; specific HSE requirements shall be used as the reference of the corporation's HSE management program (including annual HSE management program and project HSE management program, etc.) and single well HSE plan and the key contents of HSE reports at all levels and classifications. HSE management programs and single well HSE plan at all levels (top management, middle level, basic level) provide systematic criteria and guidance for the HSE work of their applicable objectives; the implementation and completion of HSE management program and single well HSE plan needs the supporting and coordination of relevant HSE working procedures and working standards; all the staff develop HSE activities and standardize their behavior in light of relevant HSE working procedures and working standards; the corporation's self-assessment, supervision, audit and review of the HSE management system offers unexhausted driving force for the normal development and continual improvement of HSE work.

### Risk Management
HSE risk management is a dynamic uninterrupted course; it is the core of all HSE management system elements. The corporation gives plan, implementation and maintenance of necessary preventive actions and emergency plans according to the identification and assessment results of HSE aspects (including hazards that may cause person injury  and property damage,  and environmental aspects that may  bring environmental impact); establish, implement and perfect relevant HSE management program and HSE plan to realize the continual improvement of HSE objectives and targets; the effective operation of operational control, emergency preparedness, and HSE management program and HSE plan, relies on the coordination of supervision, measurement and analysis, and the implementation of corrective, preventive and improvement actions. The above elements constitute the main line of the corporation's HSE risk management control. The assistant elements of the above main line are documents and data and their control, record control, organizational responsibility and authority, competence, awareness and training, communication and consultation, which penetrate in all stages of HSE control main line. International audit ensures the normal operation and conformity of the corporation's HSE management control main line. Management review (system maintenance) carries out the continual improvement of HSE management system from higher level. HSE affair control main line, internal audit and management review constitute the third levels supervisory mechanism of HSE risk management.
In the aspects of corporation, business divisions and operating projects, their annual HSE management programs give planning and deployment of HSE risk management of different levels. And the five sets of documents for basic level work designed by the corporation and developed by every specialty (single well HSE prospectus, HSE position guidance, construction design, HSE record and HSE examination table) offer guidance for HES risk management of single well construction project, based on defined requirements of laws and regulations, specific customers and other interested parties. In addition, as the basic data and management tools of HSE risk management, the corporation has developed relevant preventive actions and emergency actions for 30 significant HSE incidents on the basis of HSE aspects identification and assessment, these actions are used as HSE issue toolbox.

### Risk Assessment
All contractors and service companies shall deliver risk assessment matrix for their further operations to Company, this assessments shall be reviewed and audited by PASARGAD. Also before any un-routine operation or SIMOPS relevant risk assessment shall be done.
The corporation identifies occupational health and safety hazards and environmental aspects, assesses their risk grade and significance according to applicable laws and regulations and other requirements, and plans relevant control actions, especially for those intolerable occupational health and safety risks and significant environmental aspects.
HSE aspects identification and assessment is developing and changing process, it includes making definite the requirements of laws and regulations and the impact caused by the corporation's personnel change, business development, technological upgrading, raw material replacement and requirements of interested parties, etc. The corporation ensures timely upgrading to be consistent with occupational health and safety hazards and environmental aspects.
Based on the results of hazard identification and relevant risk assessment, the corporation classifies them into four types: unacceptable risk, high risk, moderate risk, low risk. Different management actions shall be planned to correspond to the above risk grades. Based on environmental aspects identification, two kinds of environmental aspects are assessed, significant environmental aspect and general environmental aspect. Matching management actions shall be planned to cope with the above-mentioned two kinds of environmental aspects.

### Lifting operations
Lifting and handling of hazardous materials policy is prepared by PASARGAD:
All utilized Lifting Gears shall be inspected and tested as per reference standards and PASARGAD policy and Color coded.
Using Correct Carrying Unit (CCU) is mandatory for all cargos are transferring to operation sites or Back loaded.

### H2S response plan
Company planned H2S Contingency and assigned a competent Service Company to implement the plan. All personnel will be trained to act in emergency situations.
H2S drills will be done in regular basis.
Additionally to rig H2S detection system, H2S Service Company will install H2S detection system, cascade System with air reserve for 1 hour, and distribute SCBAs and EEBAs in accommodation and work locations.
For rig‐less operations H2S Service Company will provide separate package and will act same as presence of rig.
The proposed H2S cascade system for well No#006 can provide breathing air minimum one hour for maximum involved personnel during emergency case (Gas release).

### Emergency response plan
PASARGAD has its own emergency response plan:
We organized the establishment of emergency management plan for all specialties and operating areas. This plan makes definite the necessary equipment, training and personnel for protecting employees, customer, the mass, environment and corporate reputation in case of the occurrence of emergent matters. Every operating project is required to carry out specific emergency plan (program or pre-emergency plan) in consideration of its own situation on the basis of the emergency plan and relevant emergency actions made by the top management and  middle level. The specific requirements for  emergency  preparedness and response, include, but not limited to: emergency plan is prepared according to the risk that has significant impact to  our production and  operation; emergency plan is  written  and  kept in  the archives for  easy reference; clear communication is made between levels and is in consistent with the corporation's emergency management system; decide and inspect equipment, facilities and persons for emergency response, with unflagging alertness; train emergency personnel to know emergency plan, their roles and responsibilities, how to use emergency management tools and resources; drill is made to facilitate the assessment and improvement of emergency response capability, including the connection with external organizations and their participation; upgrade emergency plans periodically to absorb the experience and lessons acquired in past accidents and drills.
Corporation requirement: external organizations' participation in emergency preparedness and response shall be documented definitely and we shall notify them with possible case they shall participate in and offer information required for participating response activity. Our emergency preparedness and response system provides a framework and its provision of definite responsibility and support and backup integrate single emergency plan into a complete emergency network. This framework contains emergency response, response assessment, and dispersion reduction and recovery after emergency, it is universal relevance. One emergency incident is under three levels control at most, and every level is with definite functional director and division of responsibility.

### Reporting
Reports shall be prepared and sent to company as per HSE plan: Daily report
Weekly report Monthly report
Accident/incident report

### Performance
Standard of performance is the basis of monitoring and measuring HSE performance. Either as a whole or for details, everyone must understand and know clear what is necessary to do. For the person in charge of special position, his responsibility and performance shall be measurable.
When there is any exception occurring to HSE performance, the functional director shall make necessary analysis, check whether the process capability meets relevant HSE requirements, and adopt necessary preventive action and corrective action to ensure the HSE performance in conformity with the requirements of given standards.

### Quality
No non‐certified tools and equipment are allowed to be used in this project;
Checking, testing, and inspection is critical for performance operations;
Preventive  maintenance  system  for  equipment  and  tools  shall  be  established.  All  contractors  and service companies must have Inspection and Test Plan for their equipment.
Carry quality internal audit at least twice a year.
Carry out Customer Satisfaction Survey.

## Section-4
Surface Prepare and Well Bore Displace Program

### 4.1.6 Well test Interval Information
Well completion see annex. The target: Asmari formation and test interval as follows：
Table 1 Reservoir formation data
The objectives of perforation, acidizing and well testing operations are:
To increase well productivity and analyzing reservoir formation by testing.
Acidizing the formation to remove the skin in near well-bore area
To evaluate the Asmari formations productivity before and after acidizing
Run PLT to determine production profile distribution in different Asmari sub layer
Take down hole and surface samples

### Pre-Prepare Job procedure
Surface equipment preparation and pressure test
General points regarding rig-up of surface well test equipment are as follows:
Rig-up surface well test equipment package as per layout plan.
Where pipework crosses walkways, pipe should be made clearly visible (with danger tape) and tripping hazards minimized. Pipework should be close to the ground.
Tag  the  instrument  air  supply  valve  to  the  separator to  ensure  continuous supply  so  that  testing operations are not interrupted unintentional.
Erect barriers, display pressure test signs and make announcements to warn personnel when pressure testing is about to commence.
After getting a work permit, pressure test the surface test equipment as per the procedures and record all pressure tests on a chart recorder.
During pressure testing check the following:
The orifice meter sliding valve holds pressure
The  choke  manifold  isolation  valves  are  tested  independently  to  ensure  choke  changes  and inspections can be made.
The following should be included as part of pressure testing surface well test equipment:
Flush all surface lines and equipment from rig floor through burner heads and gas lines
P/T entire system to 1,000 psi against burner heads (plugged).
P/T against oil and gas manifold to 1,000 psi.
P/T separator gas outlet & bypass, oil outlet & bypass plus water outlet to 1,000 psi.
P/T upstream of choke manifold & HP side of choke manifold to the 5,000 psi.
P/T downstream of choke manifold to separator inlet and oil & gas bypass to 1,000 psi.
At the end of pressure testing ensure all barriers and signs are removed. Also inform personnel by the PA system and sign off permits.

### Choke Manifold
Prepare the choke manifold as outlined below:
Pressures test the choke manifold as per CONTRACTOR procedures to 5,000 psi.
Pressure is to be bled-off between each test.
Check all service breaks.
Prepare the necessary fixed choke and check condition as per standard.
On completion of pressure testing all valves should be left open. Drift the choke manifold to 3.00”.

### Function Test for ESD System
Requirements and points to note for the ESD system are as follows:
Remote shutdown points for the ESD system shall be installed at the choke manifold, at the test separator and outside the lab cabin.
The  separator  instrument air  supply  will  be  an  integral  component of  the ESD  system.  Air  supply interruptions will activate the ESD system and shut-in the well at the flow line.
The ESD system is to be function tested. The function test will be witnessed by the Well Test Engineer. Record should be in the Well Test Report.

### Surface Sampling Equipment
Prepare sample bottles according to procedures.
Gas sample bottles need to be evacuated prior to commencing sampling operations.
Ensure all sampling equipment is fitted with earthing straps.
All sample containers are to be clearly labeled and a sample list produced. Labels should include client company name, well name, test interval, test number, flow period, sample number, sampling date & time, sampling point and sample type/nature.
Note: All sampling containers are to be earthed prior to and during the taking of hydrocarbon samples, pressurized or atmospheric.

### Calibration and Check
The following calibration checks of surface well test equipment should be carried out:
Calibrate differential pressure gauges using a manometer.
Surface pressure gauges shall be calibrated at the base prior to mobilization using a dead weight tester.
Check flow meter calibrations by pumping water through each meter. Obtain two consistent results for each meter.
Check condition of measuring instruments, etc. thermometers, hydrometers etc.
Ensure all orifice plates & choke beans are in good condition and an adequate supply is on hand.

### Pressure Test for Surface Test Equipment
Test all surface test equipment and surface test lines to minimum of anticipated operating pressure (all tests should include a low pressure test of approximately 500psi where applicable). All tests should include be held for 10 minutes.

### Slick line Preparation
Slick line unit check
Check the engine oil level, diesel oil level, hydraulic oil level, water/antifreeze level.
Check the weight indicator system.
Check the depth recorder (mechanical or electrical).
Check the brake and illumination system.
Check the electric circuit.
Check shift and all switches are on the correct position.
Start engine to check engine status is normal or not.
Check any bleed of air hose and oil hose.

### BOP and lubricator check
Check the equipment working pressure rating equal to or greater than 1.2 times the maximum expected wellhead pressure.
Check the lubricator length and verify that its reach standards.
Function tests the BOP at the surface.

### Slick line tool check
Check and record all down hole tool’s fish neck (FN) type and parameters.
Fully check and function test all tools including back up tools.

### Pressure & temperature gauge check
Make sure  pressure & temperature memory  gauge  (DHMG)  is not out of  calibration  date  and  it is smoothly working.
Make sure the DHMG capacity is sufficient.
Make sure all batteries condition is good.

### Operation Program
Running protective sleeve
Lay out slick-line winch, work shop, and PCE as “Technical Specifications for slickline Operation” Q/SY GWDC 0166—2015  defined.
Connect lubricator, stuffing box, and basic down hole tool string.
Rig up the wellhead pressure control equipment (PCE).
P/T the PCE according to the client’s requirement.
Open the well under supervision of supervisor, and RIH SCSSSV protective sleeve, control the speed under 15m/min.
Check and record statistic weight, raise weight, and slack off weight before 15m above SCSSSV, hand jar to release the protective sleeve and POOH..

#### Note: Only slickline crew is allowed to stay in operation area during hand jar operation. Make sure all crew get sufficient rest for it is tough job under extremely hot weather.
R/D slickline wellhead PCE, move all slickline equipment for CTU operation if need.

### Displace completion fluid (If required)
In case that well is not perforated, completion fluid shall be displaced by diesel.
Rig up CTU, connect pump trucks to CTU, pressure test flow line and coiled tubing to 6000psi/10mins (maximum permissible pressure need confirm with CTU crew), bleed off directly to waster pit. Carry out displacing job as following:
Rig up injector head, connect injector control and power hydraulic hose, disconnect flange cap on the top of X-tree.
Stab in CT, rig up BOPs and function test BOPs rams.
Connect CT down-hole tools, mount BOPs on the top of X-tree with flange connection.
Rig up injector with CT on the top of BOPs.
Rig up pumping line to CTU.
Rig up pumping line to wellhead wing valve.
Pressure test pumping line with water to 4000psi.
Open X-mas tubing valves and production wing adjustable choke which lead to waster pit. RIH CT at speed 20m/min with pumping rate less than 0.3bpm and flow the well to burning pit through adjustable choke. Pull test should be performed every 500m. Set-down force should be less than 500kg. (Slow down the RIH &POOH speed at ID changing point.)
When RIH CT to bottom of perforations, hold CT and pump Water/diesel with pump rate more than 1bpm. Observe return fluid and recycle diesel as much as possible, when BS&W<5% (density follow 1.00-
1.01g/cm3) ，POOH CT to surface, close swab valve, bleed off pressure and rig down CT equipment.
Table 2 Pumping schedule with water/diesel

## Section-5 Perforation Program

### Perforating Tools and Equipment Information
Perforating Guns Information (Recommended as plan A to D)
Table 3 Perforation Guns Information

### Firing head design
The TTP firing head uses one electrical detonator to activate the gun string. The electric power will be transmitted to the detonator through the wireline cable from the surface power system (logging unit); the detonator will be fully activated when the enough current is applied on the detonator.

### well head pressure control equipment (WPCE)
the Company can supply two sizes of WPCE for the job. One type ID is 3 1/8”, the other one type ID is 4 1/16”. The manufacture of both  WPCE is  ASEP-Elmar of NOV. Work Pressure grade for  both  WPCE is 10000psi, can work with H2S. Both have one dual-RAM 10000psi-H2S hydraulic-BOP. Both can work with the 7/32” and 15/32” wireline cable (the RAMs and flow tubes can be changed to fit the cable size).
WPCE component: API Standard flange, release/ pump-in sub, BOP, tool trap, lubricators, tool catcher, grease injector and stuffing box, grease pump.
Lubricator number and length:
1/8” ID WPCE: 6 pieces 8ft & 1 piece 4ft lubricators.
1/16” ID WPCE: 6 pieces 10ft & 1 piece 4ft lubricators.

### 5.2. TTP Operation Procedure
Below are the outlines for the treatment procedure:
TTP Pre requisites and shop preparation.
Pre-job preparation
Pre-job meeting
TTP Runs procedure

### 5.2.1 TTP Pre-requisites and shop preparation
Get all relevant information from the client with a job design questionnaire filled by the client. The perforated intervals need to be in writing signed from the client.
Make the gun loading diagram and gun string BHA for each run as per the job design questionnaire and cross check by different supervisor. Calculate the length and weight of each run gun string.
Prepare the perforating guns, tandem sub, firing heads and all the related tools and equipment which will be used and needed for this job following the BHA. All the tools must be verified by the field engineer that all are in good condition and meet the job’s requirement.
Select the proper type firing head.
Apply the right type and quantity explosive materials, such as, shaped charge, prima cord, booster and transport to the wellsite for loading the guns.
Hold safety meeting and Load the guns at wellsite as per job design questionnaire and final gun diagram and make sure to numbering and classifying properly.
The logging unit is checked and in good condition. CCL log is qualified. Test shooting, Tension, depth and the other functions of the unit work properly.
If the well head has pressure before or after shooting. The max pressure should be confirmed with the client for select the proper pressure grade well head pressure control equipment (WPCE).
If under balance perforating method is adopted, the under balance pressure should be confirmed with company, too high differential pressure maybe be result in the gun string big jumping up and damage the cable while perforating.
The perforating interval should be filled with fluid (except the gas gun was used) and fluid column pressure is enough for the safety sub working.
Arrange and identify each gun for easy identification during string make up at the well site.
Ensure all the required equipment is available, checked and sufficient re-dress kits available.
Mobilize the equipment to the well site.

### Mobilization to Well-site
All the detonators must be storage and transported in the separate safety box from the perforating guns and charges. (This step may have done by security department)
Project manager, field engineer and operators shall identify the job risks, confirm the route to well-site and brief the emergency response plan. 《Base Pre-job Safety Review》 shall be filled up.
The senior operator identifies the job risks, confirms the route to well-site and briefs the emergency response plan.
The engineer is in charged to ensure the logging crew to reach the well-site safely. Security guard is required to the local authority while the logging team is on the way to well-site.
The policy of CONTRACTOR and journey management plan must be followed.

### Well-site job
Pre-job Preparation of TTP:
Confirm with client and double check the job information, perforating interval, well pressure, formation pressure, the right tool connection, flange size and grade, the BHA diagram and the overall operation sequences.
The Guns should be clearly marked in the order they will be assembled, and Gun storage selected to mitigate heat or impact problems.
Locate all the units at right position, Check the logging unit and well control equipment. Make sure all the functions of these units can work properly. Power on the logging system and do the test logging and test shoot, the logging system can get the qualified logging result: curves, depth, tension and shooting panel can apply the enough electrical power for the detonator.
Check the size of the well control equipment and can connect to the well head flange. The pressure grade can meet the job requirement.
Connect the flange, release sub, BOP, flapper to the wellhead.
Unload the lubricators and grease injector. Assembling enough number of flow tubes with tool catcher and stuffing box, passing the cable head through the stuffing box, flow tubes and tool catchers. Assembling enough numbers of lubricators and pass the cable head through the lubricators, and ready for connecting the tool and gun string.
Assembling the sings, lifting clamp, spreader plate for lifting the lubricators on the top lubricators, connect the top sheave and load cell to the spreader plate. Connect the spreader plate to the hook of the crane. Pass the cable through the top sheave.
Fix the chain or sling to the body of the well head Christmas tree and connect the bottom sheave.
Connect all the necessary hoses, pipes and cables for the logging unit, well head pressure control equipment and ready for job.

### Pre-job Safety meeting and requirements
Safety is first!
Before carrying out any work, chief engineer must firstly inspect the well site and discuss with the client representative, all the hazards.
A safety meeting is held to revise the main risks of operation, PPE requirement and emergency plan.
All the job related parties shall attend this meeting. All should agree and fully understand the intended TTP job profile.
Be sure that the following responsibilities are clearly understood.
CONTRACTOR does not operate any equipment that is not owned by CONTRACTOR. These include the wellhead valves, SSSV, third party crane, etc. one pressure gauge should be provided by the client to monitor the well head pressure and help the crew controlling the well.
All non-essential personnel must keep far away from the well head during gun assembly and handling.
Be sure that all CONTRACTOR explosive safety procedures are understood and observed.
As an electric potential could trigger the detonators, So Radio silence is necessary. All the cell
phones, big power radios and etc. must be kept off during the detonator assembling. After the detonator is installed to the gun string and till the time which it reaches to depth of 200ft, or during POOH to surface after 200ft keep radio silence. Welding and cutting operations is forbidden. During radio silence safety switch must be put on safe condition and its key must be kept by the personnel who connect/disconnect the detonator.
Arming procedures must be suspended during an imminent threat of large static electricity discharges such as lightning or storms. It is seriously recommending that all the explosive related jobs will be done at daytime and good weather.
All personnel not specifically required for gun loading, gun assembly and handling must leave the area, as stated previously.
All the units must have good ground connection.
Inspections shall be done to make sure that no electric field is generated between the well and the logging unit (Maximum allowable potential difference is lower than 2.0 V-DC&AC before ground cable connecting to the wellhead and lower than 0.25 V-DC&AC after ground cable connecting to the well head, both should be satisfied). In the event this voltage is exceeded, all sources of electrical energy must be switched off. If this problem can’t be solved, CONTRACTOR perforating crew can’t do the perforating job for this well.
CONTRACTOR’s specialized personnel shall only perform operations involving the use of explosives. The number of persons involved shall be as low as possible. Only the CONTRACTOR's operator is allowed to control electric circuits, to load and unload guns.
The explosive shall be stored in a designated locked container or safety simple warehouse, marked with international recognized explosive signs, and keep in a safety area on the wellsite. Should never be
stored in the vicinity of other hazardous materials, e.g. flammable or combustible liquids, compressed gases.
Gun loading should be done in a barricaded area using” explosive danger” or equivalent warning tape, with at least 25.0m distance from the other crew working area and non-responsible personnel entry to this area is forbidden.

### Loading Gun
GENERIC LOADING INSTRUCTIONS
Field engineer should hold a safety meeting to agree on a safe loading area which must be clearly posted with "DANGER EXPLOSIVES" signs before loading begins at well site.
Select the appropriate gun kit, proper charges for job, and other needed parts and supplies such as O- rings, detonating cord and tools needed to load gun. The appropriate bull plug, tandem sub, and top fire sub must also be selected.
If the HSD gun is used, the following steps are suit for the HSD gun loading:
Remove the set screws that hold the charge tube in place.
Remove the charge tube from the gun body and place on an appropriate rack or loading table for assembly.
Inspect the gun kit to insure that it is complete with each of its resident parts. Do not assemble these parts at this point.
Select a roll of detonating cord for the application. The length of the detonating cord must accommodate the length of gun plus the length that will be taken up during charge installation and wrapping around tube plus approximately 12 inches on both ends.

#### CAUTION
NEVER USE A DETONATOR CRIMPER OR DIAGONAL CUTTERS TO CUT DETONATING CORD.
Insert end of Detonating Cord either through the tube or around the tube as required, for the gun system being used; and through the center hole in the bottom end plate.
Install charges in the charge tube as required for gun from bottom up, making sure detonating cord is in slot on each charge.
Using an approved method, make a good clean cut on end of detonating cord. Attach a booster, to the detonating cord using an approved crimping method.
Ensure that the explosive components of both the booster and the detonating cord are in intimate contact before crimping the booster in place.
Insert the assembled charge tube into the gun body. Visually inspect the alignment of the charges, scallops and locking mechanism to insure that proper alignment of charges will be achieved when the locking mechanism is engaged.
Engage alignment latch into slots and install set screws on each end of gun body.
Install proper O-rings on bull plug, if this is to be the bottom gun, or the bottom tandem sub, if this gun is to be an intermediate tandem, lubricate and screw on the bottom of gun.
Push the charge tube from the top to the bottom with the approved tools.
Using an approved method to make a good clean cut on top end of detonating cord.
Crimp a booster on the detonating cord making sure that the end of the detonating cord is in intimate contact with the booster powder.
Install proper O-rings on tandem sub, lubricate and screw on top of the gun. Insert nylon booster centralizer in the end of the tandem sub.
Make sure that nylon spacer does not extend beyond the top of the tandem sub.
Mark the loaded sections on the gun for later reference.
Connect two guns or more together and ready for connecting to the fire head.
Notice: enough fluid should fill the perforating interval to protect the HSD perforating guns and let the safety sub work.
If the TTP carrier is used, the following steps are suit for the TTP carrier loading:
Install charges on the TTP carrier as required for gun from bottom up. And fix the charge by the special spanner and charge clips.
Connect the two or three guns together by TTP carrier joint.
Adjust the top channel direction of the charge, the let the channel direction follow the prima cord wind direction.
Install the prima cord inside the channel and fix by charge clips from bottom to top.
Use the prima cord end cap to protect the prima cord end side.

### Installation and assembly of the firing head
Carry out the safety requirement and actions, such as radio silence and etc. set the logging unit shooting panel to safe mode, lock the switch handle and remove the key of the handle.
Visually inspect all components of the blaster sub (fire head) to make sure they have not been damaged during transport and that O-rings are installed.
Check the detonator by using special safety blaster meter and safety magazine, the resistance of the detonator should be in the required range. Install the good detonator into the blaster sub and connect the blaster sub to the safety sub and connect to the CCL.
Connect the CCL and firing head with wireline cable head, and fixed. Suspend the firing head.
Remove the handling cap from the top tandem sub of the gun string.
If everything is ok, connect the gun string to the bottom of the fire head.

### RIH Tool String
You need totally 6 points of responsibility while rig up the gun string and lubricators as follow:
Crane operator to operate the hook and guide lubricators to the flapper head
Well head operator to connect the lubricators and hold the flapper open while RIH.
One person in charge of logging cable
One person to hold the tension cable
Hand pump in charge person to pump and catch the cable inside the staffing box normally logging truck driver is responsible.
Lubricator in charge person to hold and guide lubricators while standing up, this person is also responsible to remove the trolley and put the cap on bottom of lubricators.
Pass the gun string through the lubricators until bottom stop upper than tool trap-Lubricator connection and let the tool catcher catch the cable head. Connect the trolley to the bottom of the lubricators.
Call hand pump in charge person to put 2000 psi pressure on the staffing box to fix the cable inside the staffing box.
Call crane operator to slowly raise the lubricators and foreman have to walk with lubricators toward the well head fences and when the lubricators stand in vertical position he removes the trolley and put the cap in bottom of lubricators.
While lubricators are raising up engineer have to assign persons to hold tension cable, logging cable, and hand pump to make sure there will be no problem happen during rig up the tools and lubricators.
Well head operator has to adjust and connect the lubricator to the flapper top and tighten the connection.
Command the crane operator to start the grease injection unit and build up its pressure 500psi over well head pressure.
Pass the cable through the bottom sheave.
Confirm with winch man to keep the tension on the cable to make it straight and set zero depth to make it ready for RIH. Do the pressure test for the lubricators if needed.
Tell well head operator to open the tool trap.
Confirm with well head crew to slowly open the well head and check the wellhead pressure that is QP reading.
Call hand pump in charge person to release the tools.
Start to RIH with 5 m/min speed. Winch man and engineer should pay more attention to the cable tension when start RIH.
If the tools are difficult to RIH, Assign well head operator to shake the wire line cable and help the tools RIH.
After passing the well head you can increase the speed to 10 m/min.
Near the no-go point keep speed on 10 m/min or less.
After passing critical points increase the speed less than50m/min in casing, it depends on the well bore condition.

#### Notice: Do not increase the winch speed more than 30m/min in open hole, perforation and production zones;
Before reach the designed aim perforating depth, does the depth correlation follow the order of the witness.

### Depth control
The TTP depth correlation uses a wireline CCL log run through the casing. The CCL curve allows identification of components in the casing.
After RIH the gun string, the CCL tool which locates at the end of the cable head will present one CCL log curve on the logging software; the CCL will detect the casing collar and present one peak on the log cure.
Compare the CCL log curve with the CBL or Full set log CCL curve, and then you can know the difference between the perforating depths with the real log depth, and then do the depth correlation.
After the depth correlation finished, go down the gun string and then log up to the designed depth.
Now is ready for shooting.

### Gun Firing

#### Caution: Only after getting the permission and under the supervision of the company man or witness then firing the guns.
Once confirmed the guns are on the designed perforating depth spot after depth correlation. Hold one safety meeting with company man, everyone involved in the operation.
Apply enough power on the shooting panel of the logging unit. Check the current and voltage gauge to judge if the gun fired or not. Change back to logging mode.
Monitor the wellhead pressure gauge to observe gun shooting. Observe the well control stack for possible indication of gun firing (shock or sound).
Once confirmed the guns fired, move the gun string up to avoid stuck following by the TTP supervisor.
If there is no indication of firing. Do the firing procedure again.
Ready for POOH.

### Gun Retrieval
The following safety procedures must be observed when retrieving guns.
When guns are 200ft below surface, stop POOH. Holding safety meeting with all personnel involved in reverse deployment of guns.
All non-essential personnel must keep far away from the well head during gun assembly and handling.
Be sure that all CONTRACTOR explosive safety procedures are understood and observed.
As an electric potential could trigger the detonators, So Radio silence is necessary. All the cell phones, big power radios must be keep off.
Arming procedures must be suspended during an imminent threat of large static electricity discharges such as lightning or storms. It is seriously recommending that all the explosive related jobs will be done at daytime.
Again near no-go area decrease the speed to 10 m/min or less.
About 50 meter near the well head again decrease the speed to 5m/min and tell one operator to shake the wire line cable near the ground, in case of stuck the cable will raise and you can find there is a problem and stop POOH.
Assign one person to observe the tool trap whenever the tools enter the lubricators it will close and you will find the tools are already in lubricators.
Immediately the well head operator has to tell the winch driver to stop the movement.
Call well head crew to close the well.
Release the trapped pressure by opening the release valve (or from the well testing manifold); make sure there is no extra pressure is trapped inside the equipment.
Tell hand pump in charge person to increase the hand pump pressure to 2000 psi and catch the cable by this way on stuffing box. And winch man releases enough cable for rig down. Remove the cable from the bottom sheave.
Now well head operator has to open the lubricator –flapper connection and crane operator should lift up the lubricators.
Note: Be careful about the potential H2S inside the well control stack and gun string, and SCBA, H2S detector should be used for safety if there is H2S found.
While the lubricators are laying down one operator have to be in charge of putting trolley on bottom of the lubricators.
Lay down the lubricator on the racks. Release the stuffing box pressure and release the tool catcher.
Remove the trolley and pull out the gun string from the lubricators to check the gun fired or not.
If misfired, run new guns for this interval.
Note: In all cases, be aware that the firing adaptor and guns may contain trapping pressure. Therefore, wear protective goggles. Exercise care since there may be pressure trapped in the adaptor. Trapped fluids can escape and hurt the people.
Note: Suspect that there may be trapped pressure in any connection that is inexplicably hard to undo. Never stand in line with a connection that is being loosened.
Note: Prior to disconnecting a normally fired gun, make absolutely sure there is no pressure trapped inside. Using a bent rod, verify that perforation holes in the gun are not plugged. Wear protective goggles, stand to one side of the hole being verified and clear the area of unnecessary personnel. Even though pressure has been bled off at the top of the gun string, guns further down the string may still contain trapped pressure. Proceed with disassembly only after the possibility of trapped pressure has been eliminated. (For HSD gun)
Note: Be particularly careful when disconnecting misfired or unfired guns. Always assume that these contain high pressure from explosive gases or from down hole well pressure. Both of these are extremely dangerous.
Second run, third run, fourth run, repeat the above steps.

### Rig down
After all the intervals perforated, POOH to surface and Rig down all the tools and equipment.
Deliver the data to the witness.
Connect the original flange and close the well, clean the production tree and wellsite. Go back to base.

### 5.5 Job safety analysis

## Section-6
Well Testing Program

### Initial clean up
To back produce the completion fluid and recycle diesel, the clean-up of well from small choke size to full choke size 48/64" is conducted. The duration of the clean-up flow period will depend very much on the flow performance of the well; in any case, stabilized flow conditions and less than 1 % BS&W should be achieved before shutting-in the well. At the end of the clean-up flow period a contingent set of separator samples will be taken.
Actual flow times and choke settings will be determined by the Well Test Engineer and will depend on well response and operational considerations prevailing at the time. The planned test periods and the expected duration of each test period are different, actual test periods will be determined by the Well Test Supervisor/Reservoir Engineer according to well response condition in site.
Carry out H2S emergency drill and hold pre-test safety meeting before firing gun and cleanup for well test.
Double check all valve status of choke manifold downstream by well test engineer and operator.
Open CONTRACTOR choke manifold slowly on adjustable choke and flow-back the well to the flare pit, by-passing the test separator. Divert completion fluid, residual drilling mud and residual acid (it will be neutralized with chemicals until the PH of returning fluid equal to 7, if acidizing after) into waste pit.
Note: Collect residual drilling cutting, mud solids, sands and other solid matter if this is available, if the well is not capable of sustaining flow, spot acid in front of perforated intervals by CT and inject it into the formation. For detail, refer to optional operation: Well Alive and Acid Spot Operation in section 7.
Gradually increase adjustable chokes size as per directed by the Well Test Engineer. If the well does not flow, spot acid in front of perforated intervals by CT and inject it into the formation. For detail refer to 7.3 : Well Alive And Spot Acid By CT Operation.
Once first hydrocarbons reach surface, collect reservoir fluids sample from the needle valve of data head, CO2 and H2S dragger tube measurements must be made immediately and repeated every 5- 10 minutes until the well is stabilized on a fixed choke size and then at 30 minutes intervals.
Note: All personnel involved in the H2S measurements must wear breathing apparatus!
Any H2S level is to be immediately reported to the Well Test Engineer who will confirm the information and then report to the Drilling/Completion Supervisor and the Rig Manager.
Once reasonable stable flow has been achieved, switch flow to 48/64” fixed choke and stabilize the well. Monitor FTHP, BS&W, PH and water salinity to monitor the well clean-up progress.
BS&W measurements should be below 1%.

### Hanging down-hole memory gauge (DHMG)
RIH 2” GC to the depth of DHMG that will be hanged, then POOH.
Note: Control the speed within 15m/min during first 100m and 50m above the ID variation point, meanwhile monitor the tension to prevent any blockage, after passing, lift a little check the passing condition. Check static, raise and slack off weight per 500m.
Break lubricator and replace GC with DHMG.

#### Note: Hand jar to confirm RP arrived can try to close the well under supervision.
RIH the tool string to the depth as supervisor required, control the speed within 15m/min during pass the wellhead and ID variation of down-hole tool string

### Initial flow test
After set the down-hole memory gauge, once sediment below approx.0.5%, divert flow through the test separator. Send produced gas to flare pit, water to the waste pit and oil to the storage tanks or to flare pit.
Establish stable flow conditions and produce well at constant flow rate through the separator. The Well Test Engineer will determine the duration of the flow period. Duration of 12 hours is expected.
Close choke manifold for initial build-up.
POOH DHMG after 24hours, and R/D slickline PCE.

### Spot acid by CT
RIH CT to TD, spot acid to perforation tunnels, and pickle tubing.  POOH CT to surface and flow back until BS&W less than 5 %.
Note: During step 6.1 Initial clean up, if the well is not capable of sustaining flow and 50bbl acid had spot in front of perforated intervals by CT and inject it into the formation, this step will delete and directly perform injectivity test. For detail, refer to: Well Alive and Acid Spot Operation in section 7.3.

### Injectivity Test
Perform injectivity test. If the pump pressure near WHP limit when pump rate lower than 5bpm, perform another acid spot by CT. For detail, refer to injectivity test in section 7.

### Matrix acidizing
High Volume Acidizing. For detail, refer to section 8.

### Post acid clean up
To back produce the spent acid and recycle diesel., the clean-up of well from small choke size to full choke size 48/64" is conducted. The duration of the clean-up flow period will depend very much on the flow performance of the well; in any case, stabilized flow conditions and less than 1 % BS&W should be achieved before shutting-in the well. At the end of the clean-up flow period a contingent set of separator samples will be taken.
Actual flow times and choke settings will be determined by the Well Test Engineer and will depend on well response and operational considerations prevailing at the time. The planned test periods and the expected duration of each test period are different, actual test periods will be determined by the Well Test Supervisor/Reservoir Engineer according to well response condition in site.
Carry out H2S emergency drill and hold pre-test safety meeting before firing gun and cleanup for well test.
Double check all valve status of choke manifold downstream by well test engineer and operator.
Open CONTRACTOR choke manifold slowly on adjustable choke and flow-back the well via the surge tank to the flare pit, by-passing the test separator. Divert completion fluid, residual drilling mud and residual acid (it will be neutralized with chemicals until the PH of returning fluid equal to 7, if acidizing after) into waste pit.
Note: Require well test crew to collect residual drilling cutting, mud solids, sands and other solid matter if they is available, if the well is not capable of sustaining flow, other method will be discussed.
Gradually increase adjustable choke size as per directed by the Well Test Engineer.
Note: If the well is not capable of sustaining flow, spot acid in front of perforated intervals by CT and inject it into the formation.
Once first hydrocarbons reach surface, collect reservoir fluids sample from the needle valve of data head, CO2 and H2S dragger tube measurements must be made immediately and repeated every 5-10 minutes until the well is stabilized on a fixed choke size and then at 30 minutes intervals.
Note: All personnel involved in the H2S measurements must wear breathing apparatus!
Any H2S level is to be immediately reported to the Well Test Engineer who will confirm the information and then report to the Drilling/Completion Supervisor and the Rig Manager.
BS&W measurements should be below 5%.

### Main flow test
R/U slickline wellhead PCE and P/T as per CONTRACTOR standards.
RIH DHMG tool string to target depth while flow well with 10/64” choke.
Switch flow from 32/64" adjustable choke to 32/64" fixed choke. Monitor FTHP and BS&W. Measure salinity and pH of any produced water if needed.
Establish stable separator conditions and continue to flow at this rate for approximately 10 hours (duration to be determined by the Well Test Engineer depending on well behavior) .
Measure the stable flow rate of 32/64″choke size.
Switch from 32/64″ fixed to 32/64″ adjustable choke. Gradually increase adjustable choke to 40/64″.
Switch flow from 40/64" adjustable choke to 40/64" fixed choke. Monitor FTHP and BS&W. Measure salinity and PH of any produced water if needed.

#### Note: Inform slickline crew to start unit and observe tension before increase choke size, and
increase choke stably and slowly.
Establish stable separator conditions and continue to flow at this rate for approximately 10 hours (duration to be determined by the Well Test Engineer depending on well behavior).
Measure the stable flow rate of 40/64″choke size.
Switch from 40/64″ fixed to 40/64″ adjustable choke. Gradually increase adjustable choke to 48/64″.
Switch flow from 48/64" adjustable choke to 48/64" fixed choke. Monitor FTHP and BS&W. Measure salinity and PH of any produced water if needed.
Establish stable separator conditions and continue to flow at this rate for approximately  10 hours
(duration to be determined by the Well Test Engineer depending on well behavior.
Measure the stable flow rate of 48/64″choke size.

#### Note:
This three choke size (determined by RE, PD engineer and well test supervisor) should be as per clean up data calculate again in site by reservoir engineer.
The third choke size may be adjusted in terms of the well performance during the previous test with two chokes.
One hour before the end of the main flow period, take a final set of separator PVT samples & liquid samples (gas, oil and water) as per reservoir engineer requirement.
3 surface oil samples, every sample is 20 liter.
3 surface gas samples, each sample is 20 liter.
3 water samples, each sample is 2 liter if formation produces water.
Throughout main flow, measure and record the following at regular intervals. Surface data acquisition will be used to monitor some of these items simultaneously.
Flowing tubing pressure and temperature.
Separator pressure and temperature
BS&W
Water chlorides and concentrations of any tracers.
Oil and gas rates and calculated gas-oil ratio (verify orifice plate used).
Oil and gas gravities.
Gas CO2 and H2S.
As required, divert separator oil line output to gauge tank for stock tank oil rate measurement and establishment of combined shrinkage/meter factor.
Note:  Carefully monitor for evidence of sand at surfaces.
Utilize methanol injection as necessary to prevent hydrates at choke manifold.

### Take oil sample from choke manifold(C/M)
The equipment involved in the job is listed as follow:
An iron barrel, 20L, whose cap is welding with two quick connections through which the fluid can go into the barrel, and one is used to connect the sample point, the other is used to connect the release hose.
A plastic hose, 30m，one side is fixed with quick connection.
A big fan from rig, used from forcing the air flow circulating fast near the choke manifold.
SCBA(Self Contained Breathing Apparatus)
H2S detector
The operation procedure to take the oil sample from choke manifold:
Take the barrel and open it, check it, and make sure it is clean inside.
Take the barrel and plastic hose to the choke manifold, and put them near the sample point on the C/M.
Connect the hose from sample point to the quick connection on the barrel.
Connect the release hose to the quick connection on the barrel, and extend its end far away to make sure the gas come out from it can’t reach the people who working on the site.
One operator who with the H2S detector, wearing SCBA(Self Contained Breathing Apparatus) to protect himself, and stand in the upwind direction, then open the fan to enforce the air to circulate strongly.
Give information to remind the people who working in the field and release person in the downwind direction.
Then open the needle valve on the sample point slowly, check the situation of the sample barrel.
When we are sure the oil sample is enough to do the analysis then close the needle valve and open all the hoses connected to the barrel, at last transfer the sample to another plastic barrel.

### Take oil & gas sample from separator
Generally at least three matched sets of pressurized samples are taken from the separator for each zone. Normally, 20 liters of gas per 600 cc oil sample are taken for recombination. In addition, a quantity of non- pressurized (atmospheric) 1 liter samples of oil and formation water will be required. The precise number of samples to be taken should be determined by the Company Petroleum Engineer prior to mobilization in order to ensure that sufficient sample bottles/containers are available.
Unless there is a separate sampling flow period, the well test program will usually call for surface PVT samples to be taken towards the end of the main flow period to ensure the well is fully cleaned up. However, for back-up purposes, it is worth collecting at least one additional set of samples as soon as conditions stabilize.
Correct sample labeling and logging of surface conditions, flow rates etc. During sampling is essential. Data sheets for each set of samples are to be completed and copies sent with the samples.
A typical sequence for surface sampling is as follows:
Flow well until stabilized wellhead conditions are achieved and solids content is less than 1.0%.
Direct flow through test separator, monitor and record process parameters.
Cease upstream chemical injection (if possible).
Connect one 20 liter evacuated gas sample bottle via sampling manifold to sampling tap on separator gas run. Connect one 600 cc positive displacement sample bottle via a sampling manifold to the sampling tap on the separator oil line.
Open the sample point valve(s) on the oil and gas lines and purge the lines and manifolds.
Open the inlet valves on both sample bottles and proceed with sampling operation. It should take 30 - 45 minutes to obtain one set of recombination samples. The rate of displacement will be controlled by the operator. The samples should then be labeled as a matched pair before starting on the next set.
Validation of the gas sample is determined by checking the bottle pressure prior to disconnection of the sampling manifold. Validation of the oil sample is determined by checking bottle pressure and volume of fluid displaced.
The sample bottles should have plugs installed to prevent leakage during shipment to the laboratory.
Completed data sheets for each sample should be included in the transport case, referencing bottle serial number, well' details, flowing conditions and parameters, time taken etc.
Figure 1 Surface Sampling System

### Main build-up test
Put choke manifold to closed position (as per instructions of the CONTRACTOR surface Specialist) for the intermediate pressure build-up period. Monitor well head pressure to ensure choke manifold fully closed. The well will be shut-in period at least 48 hours. The actual duration will be advised by the Reservoir or Well Test Engineer, and record the shut-in well pressure.
Retrieve pressure/temperature memory gauges by slick line with the well shut-in.
Perform static pressure gradient test meanwhile POOH slick line and record one point of pressure and temperature every 300 m. The time of holding on for every point is 5 minutes. R/D slickline wellhead
PCE.

### Perform PLT
Rig up and RIH PLT
Perform PLT at shut-in condition.
Flow the well through 48/64” fixed choke for 6 hours.
Perform PLT at flowing condition (48/64” fixed choke) for 2 hours.
POOH PLT.
For detail operation information, refer to Section 9 : PLT Operation Program.

### Take down-hole samples (If required)
Prepare two PDS and DHMG as per CONTRACTOR procedure.
R/U slickline wellhead PCE, and P/T as per supervisor required.
RIH PDS tool string to target depth to take PVT samples while flow well with 12/64” choke. Note: Make sure well flow is stable and BS&W is below 1%.
Waiting for PDS trigger fired and take samples, POOH.
Check all PDS take sample and Prepare to transfer it from PDS to cylinder.
Prepare to retrieve SCSSSV protection sleeve  after enough valid PVT sample take.

### POOH protective sleeve
Break lubricator and connect protection sleeve retrieve tool string.
Check static, raise, and slack off weight 15m before arrive the target, and RIH to catch the protective sleeve.
Hand Jar to unset it, POOH.
R/D slickline WPCE, and recovery the wellhead.
Table 4 Valve Status During Suspension

### Hazard Analysis and Precaution Measures
6.13.1 Hazard Analysis

### Control and Responsibilities of Well Test Supervisor/Engineer
Act as technical liaison to the drilling/completion supervisor.
Liaise between drilling/ completion supervisor & service companies
Direct supervision of service companies in preparation and execution of the test ensuring that service company equipment is available when needed, is fit for purpose, and that service company personnel are available when needed.
Review test procedures with test personnel to commencing the test
Co-ordinate collection of fluid samples in co-operation with well test supervisor
Monitor testing operation and test data.
The Well Test Supervisor is responsible for the safe and efficient operation of the well test operations.
He coordinates and communicates with the CSS (company Site Supervisor) on all operational and safety matters. He shall comply and adhere to all safety policies and procedures. He will ensure that all work is carried out under the installation permit to work system. It is his responsibility to ensure that the function and operation of the ESD safety system has been communicated to all relevant personnel. His line of safety responsibility is to the CSS.

### Health, Safety and Environment (HSE)
Safety Equipment Requirement
Safety around the surface equipment should be provided by an ESD system with 4 shut-down stations located on the rig floor, at the choke manifold and in front of the office block.
H2S monitoring system and H2S gas detector of H2S control & services contractor will be re-checked by H2S services engineer before firing gun and clean up.
Portable  foam  extinguishers  will be  available  in the  vicinity of  the  wellhead,  choke manifold,  and designated safe area(s).
Well  test  team  and operation  personnel  require  equip  with  H2S  personnel  protection  equipment, include SCBA, Portable H2S gas detector, etc.
All appropriate fighting equipment should be checked and ready for emergency use.
All vent lines from stored produced fluid vessels must be vented to the flare pit. These lines shall be checked and verified open.
The main flare pit shall be 300m away from well center and rigged up with the required number and length of flare lines for testing. All flare lines shall be properly secured.

### Sulphureted Hydrogen (H2S)
H2S levels  will  be monitored  clean-up  &  well  testing  during. Low  levels  of H2S  (<20ppm) may  be
encountered.
BA systems will be available during testing in the following locations: wellhead, choke manifold, and designated safe area(s). Samples should be taken and checked for H2S as soon as gas & fluids are produced at surface and at regular intervals during the testing.
A H2S leakage, emergency muster and protection drill with each crew shall be conducted prior to any testing.
All breathing apparatus shall be inspected and ready for emergency use. All concerned personnel on location during testing shall have H2S and SCBA training with certification.

### CONTRACTOR Well Testing H2S Emergency Plan
NOTE: When the well blows out and is out of control, the rig emergency plan should be taken.

### CONTRACTOR Emergency Response Plan
Personnel Duty Of CONTRACTOR Well Testing Crew
NOTE:
When the emergency situation happens, the first duty personnel should take action, if that time the first duty personnel is not available, the second personnel should take action. Others should escape to muster point immediately.
When the emergency situation happens and someone injures, the rescuers should take action to help him out of dangerous area, others should escape to muster point immediately.

### Emergence Exit Way
Fire Emergency Response Procedure
CONTRACTOR Communication Flow Chart
First Aid
The following first aid procedure applies to all H2S victims:
remove the victim to fresh air, upwind or crosswind from the suspected leak source
isolate the leak/source if possible
commence artificial respiration and/or administer oxygen as required
summon qualified medical assistance
keep patient quiet, comfortable and warm
if eyes are affected, wash thoroughly with water for 15 minutes – ice compresses may also be applied
Patients must be kept under medical observation until they are declared fit to return to work or they are evacuated. The possibility of delayed pulmonary oedema up to 24 hours after exposure to H2S should not be overlooked.

### Waste Management
To protect the environment, it is required to process, treat and dispose the generated waste due to completion & well test period according to project waste management policy, and minimized harm to the environment or eliminated.

### 6.16   Appendix
List of Test Equipment
Layout of Surface Test Equipment
Section-7
Injectivity Test Program

### General Requirements
Provide a coordinator to integrate all activities such as CT operation, acidizing and engineering. Hold safety meeting before each operation with all personnel involved.
The well site access road must be suitable for acid stimulation treatment equipment entry and exit.
The well site must be level and smooth, can stand with the weight of all equipment.
Check all equipment on arrival at the wellsite to make sure no damage/missing items. Pay special attention to the crossovers to ensure the threads are compatible.
Pay more attention to and check the ID and crossover of the completion string to make sure that CTU RIH and POOH freely and safely, if CT operation is required.
6)  All the tubing should be cleaned. Note：
10000 Gal Rubber Acid/Solvent Storage Tanks and hoses must be cleaned up；
Transportation tanker must be cleaned up before transporting the acid fluid；
Acid storage tank must be cleaned up before storing acid during operation；
Concentrated hydrochloric acid which is qualified after inspection can be applied in preparing acid fluid
；
Prepare enough PPE which includes: eyewash equipment, respiratory mask, mouth piece, goggle, acid- proof gloves, acid-proof overall and rain shoes, etc.
Prepare the sodium carbonate or sodium bicarbonate water solution.

### Pressure Test Operation
Move  all  the  equipment  and  accessories  to  wellsite  and  set  them  in place  according  to  attached equipment layout.
Hold safety meeting with all personnel involved.
Cordon off all high-pressure area with signal tape and forbid anyone but operators in high-pressure area.
Check that all wellhead valves are closed.
Rig up all equipment with accessories to X-mas tree according to attached equipment layout. All the high pressure equipment should connected isolation valve. Connect one pump truck to THS wing valve for balance pressure (check the packer if this step need).
Pressure test injection line up to 2000psi for 2minutes, then 6000psi for acid pump to CT, and2000HHP Fracturing pump unit to X-mas tree, and each 5minutes to make sure it is qualified; bleed off directly to waster pit.
Pressure test balance pressure line up to 3000psi; bleed off directly to waster pit (check the packer if this step need).

### Optional operation1: Well Alive and Spot Acid by CT & Killine Operation
During step 6.3 Initial clean up, if the well is not capable of sustaining flow this step will be performed . If this step was not performed during Initial clean up, it shall be performed before injectivity test.
Equipment includes 1 set CT unit, 2 set acid pump, 1 set acid tank, and 1 set water/diesel tank. The acid used is the main acid, and relative materials can refer to section 8, matrix acidizing program.
Set equipment according to actual situation on location, one acid pump connect CT, another connect kill line.
Rig up CT injector head, connect injector control and power hydraulic hose, disconnect flange cap on the top of X-tree.
Make up BHA according to down-hole condition. If the cement plug to be drilled by CT, the BHA consisting of connector, DFCV, release sub and a suitable drilling bit. If the cement plug is drilled out, the BHA consisting of connector, DFCV, release sub and a clean-out nozzle.
Stab in CT, rig up BOPs and function test BOPs rams.
Connect CT down-hole tools, mount BOPs on the top of X-tree with flange connection.
Rig up injector head with CT on the top of BOPs.
Rig up pumping line to CT. Rig up pumping line to wellhead wing valve. Pressure test to 6,000psi.
Open plug valve on CT manifold and pressure test X-tree, CT, pipe ram, stripper at 4,500psi, holding 15min without leakage.
Open wellhead and run CT with pumping water at 0.2-0.5bpm to the bottom of perforated interval.
Clean up wellbore at 1BPM to make sure bottom hole debris flow back.
Hold on CT perforation bottom with displacing 30 bbl acids; then POOH CT to 3200m and pump 20bbl acid +20bbl diesel. Bullhead with diesel. When bullhead, pump rate as high as possible, annulus pressure shall be observed and keep no higher than 4500psi. Open the gate valves of Choke Manifold immediately when flush is nearly finish. POOH CT to surface (and pump liquid nitrogen to enhance flow back if needed).
Table 5 Operation Schedule for Spot Acid by CT
NOTE1: At the end of pumping acid into formation, if no obvious pressure decrease or rate increase, go on RIH &POOH CT with acid until obvious pressure decrease or rate increase observed. For detail, refer to: Spot Acid by CT Operation after Low Injectivity in section 7.5.

### Injectivity Test
Injectivity test  will be performed just before  high volume acidizing. Equipment layout and other relative issues  can refer to section 8, high volume acidizing Program.
Set equipment according to actual situation on location.
Pressure test injection line up to 2000psi for 2minutes , then 6000psi for acid pump to X-mas tree  5 minutes to make sure it is qualified
Pump for injectivity test as following.

### Note: The operation WHP must be lower than WHPmax.

### Optional operation2: Re-spot Acid by CT Operation after Low Injectivity
This step is performed only when injectivity test pump pressure near WHP limit when pump rate lower than 5bpm, and a 60bbl acid spot has performed by CT earlier. Equipment and relative materials can refer to section 8,high volume acidizing Operation.
In this case acid wash operation shall be performed again according to the previous acid wash program.
Figure 2 Equipment layout for CT Spot

## Section-8
High Volume Acidizing  Program

### Stimulation Objectives
Reducing the Mechanical Skin (Sd) as much as possible.
Stimulation of reservoir by raising formation permeability and relieving formation damage.
Focusing on obtaining commercial production rate.
Learning of Acid Stimulation experience for other well’s job.
Prevent any induced external damages to the reservoir by an optimized stimulation design.

### Challenge and Strategy
Because of the peculiar formation and well conditions, the challenges of acidizing stimulation are presented as following:
Challenge:
Micro-fractures and wormholes are very important to produce oil in the carbonate reservoir. The reservoir is strongly heterogeneous along the interval and stimulation of such zones with lower permeability is a huge challenge.
The pump rates and volumes required to achieve a reasonable penetration in these thick treatment intervals shall be high.
High pressure High temperature oil reservoir requires appropriate operational facilities to achieve the sufficient injection rates and pressures, well-tailored treatment fluids formulations and design to reduce the corrosion effects and prevent the possible non- compatibilities of injection fluids with formation oil.
Low-friction and retarded acid required to reduce wellhead pressure and protect string and other equipment and the low corrosion for acid to iron are real challenges.
Strategy:
Composite diverting technologies: VDA+resin
Low-friction fluid (gelled acid) to reduce well head pressure is necessary.
Optimize high efficient corrosion inhibitor and additives to adapt HTHP oil reservoir.

### 8.3.3 Horse Power Estimation
2000HHP Fracturing pump units’ efficiency takes 80%, acid pumps efficiency takes 30%, 2 sets2000HHP Fracturing pump unit and 2acid pumps of 1100HP May reach4260hp.Nearly 25bpm may be reached.

### Acid Volume considering 70 m perforation interval
Tubing pickle+spot acid: 50bbl acid
Gelled acid:600bbl,considering tank bottom and low respot acid,39270 gallons total 15%HCl
VDA: 400bbl, considering tank bottom 26460 gallons 20% self-diverting acid
Diverter material : 70lb oil soluble resin
Displace: water

### Performance of Gelled Acid
It has excellent compatibility to reservoir fluid;
Static corrosion rate at 90℃of gelled acid is 4.25g/(m2.h);
Has low surface tension and interfacial tension, less than 30.0mN/m and 3.0mN/m respectively;
Stabilizing Fe3+ power is 720mg/l;
Gelled acid Viscosity 10mPas @170/s

### Performance of VDA
VDA acid reacts with carbonate, viscosity increases as acid concentration decreases. At 90℃ has viscosity 150mPas, and 120℃ is 30mPas.
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
viscosity vers acid
concentration @ 90℃
20	18	16	14	12	10	8	6	4	2	0
C (HCl%)
500
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
pH2 viscosity vers temperature
37	50	60	70	80	90	100	110	120                                      T(℃)
Figure 3 Performance of VDA

### Equipment and Material Requirement
Equipment Requirement
Table 6 Equipment Requirement (Provided by CONTRACTOR)
Coiled tubing unit should be checked and any problem should be repaired before mobilization.
Coiled tubing, BOP, stripper and downhole tools should be function tested and ensure all components are ready for operation.
Data acquisition devices should be calibrated with accuracy before bring them to well site.
All the pump units must have isolation valves.
Each pump should be individually equipped with pressure sensors.
Prepare minimum 1 pressure sensors (10,000psi) for high pressure line.
3 inch high pressure line, tee, elbow bents and valves will be used for bleed off line and for injecting pumps.
A suction manifold with isolation valves to accommodate 10000 Gal Rubber Acid/Solvent Storage Tanks is recommended to use for fluid level control in the 10000 Gal Rubber Acid/Solvent Storage Tanks.

### Chemical for Mixing Fluid
The following fluids recipe is prepared based on 70m Perforation interval (include acid spot by CT) and can be revised based on actual perforation intervals.
Table 7 Requirement of Chemical Additives for Main Acid and VDA
*After high rate pumping of pad fluid, the tubing and bottom hole temperature will lower than 90 ℃. The recommended corrosion inhibitor concentration for first round acid shall higher than 1.5%, and others lower than1.5%.

### Other Material Requirement
Table 8 Other Material Requirement

### Personnel Requirement
Table 9 Personnel Requirement

### Operation Procedures
After injectivity test, shall perform high volume acidizing without any stop.
After pressure test, all the injection line and wellhead valves shall open but the flow backline and/or well testing choke manifold gate valve.
Bullhead pre-flush fluid for isolation .Pump rate as high as possible.
Bullhead acid and divert slug alternately. Pump rate as high as possible.
Bullhead over flush fluid at max pump rate.
Bullhead Displacement water at max pump rate.
Close well 30min.
Flow back spent acid until BS&W near 0%.

### Rig Down and Demobilization
Pull out CT, close main valve on the X-tree, rig down injector, BOPs, surface line and others.
Reset wellhead and clean up well site.
Demobilization.

### Flow back Requirement
Flow back the well and recycle diesel. If the well can’t flow out ，CTU will be used as follows.
Table 10 Displacing for Flowing Well Schedule

### Requirements of Data Collection
During operation need to record parameters as follows:
Pumping rate
Pump pressure
Types and volume of pumped liquid

### Job Risk Analysis
Hydrochloric Acid (HCl)
Fresh water and bottled neutralizer shall be available at the worksite.
In the event of acid contact with the eyes, immediately flushes eyes gently with fresh water and consult a doctor as soon as practicable.
Acid contacts the skin, wash the area thoroughly with fresh water.
Remove clothing contaminated with acid solutions or additive solutions.
This clothing should not be re-worn until thoroughly washed.

### High pressure
Enclose the high pressure area with warning line;
Plot the dangerous area with warning plate;
Keep all personnel but operators far away from high pressure area while operation;
Use safety rope between the pipe line connections in case of disconnection;
The pump should be shut down immediately once the pipe line bursts.

### H2S
Portable H2S detector must be inspected annually.
All Air respirators must be inspected function.
Everyone on location should use H2S detector.
For the places where H2S may concentrate must have ventilation equipment.
Wind-vane must be obvious and showed to all personnel before entering well site.
All personnel must be trained of H2S contingency plan and the use of all related equipment.

### QHSE Requirements
QHSE requests
Irrelevant personnel are strictly prohibited to enter into the construction area.
All personnel on well-site should be equipped with full PPE, including overall, safety boContractor, helmet, goggle, gloves etc.
Pre-job safety meeting must be held and recorded, which should contain operation objective, operation procedures, potential risk analysis, job assignment, emergency program etc.
Smoking and calling are strictly prohibited on well-site.
During transporting and making up fluid, fluid should not be spilt out of the tank. Residual liquid and chemicals are forbidden to be dumped anywhere other than designated place.
Hoisting equipment shall be guide by director.
Adequate fire engines shall standby on site and sufficient firefighting equipment shall be located in designated position before operation.
First aid box shall be equipped on site with sufficient medicines.
During pressure test, high-pressure region is forbidden to enter in.
Placement of equipment should be complied with location standards.
Ensure an emergency eye washes station and shower station is available
Well site and personnel entry should be controlled in accordance with H2S operation procedure.
All jobs should be full time supervised by a CONTRACTOR Well Services supervisor on location.

### PPE
Minimum PPE requirements for all personnel working in the vicinity of the pumping operation shall be available (Hard Hat, Chemical Safety Goggles or Face Shield, Safety BoContractor, Gloves, including rubber gloves for handling acids, work gloves for rigging up/down equipment).
Personnel involved in the handling of acid shall be equipped with full protective clothing. This shall consist of Respirator and Mask, Full length rubber gloves (no pin holes), Rubber apron, Rubber safety boContractor.

### Requirements for safe operation
Acidizing operations shall comply with the following:
A dedicated line shall be used to run the pumping unit to the well. The transfer and pumping lines shall be properly secured with snubbing lines.
Under no circumstances hammers on leaking connections whilst pumping acid. The lines shall be pressure tested prior to starting the acid job.
A pressure relief valve shall be installed on the pumping unit with the vent directed away from all personnel. The vent area should be flagged off. A non-return valve shall be placed in the pumping line as close as possible to the well.
Be aware of the risk of reaction gases evolved during the wash (primarily CO2) unloading the well as they near surface.
Due to the risk of contamination and splashing personnel, live acid shall not be returned into open top fluid tanks. All acid returned from the well shall be regarded as live acid.
Extreme care must be taken during high pressure pumping while conducing acid stimulation treatments as unexpected leaks on surface lines can develop which could release the HCl acid as a fine spray. HCl acid can vaporize in air to form a noticeable cloud if released to the atmosphere. If the vapor cloud is concentrated enough it can be toxic until sufficiently dispersed.

### Job planning
Acidizing operations should not proceed in the dark unless there is adequate lighting available.
The acids used, hydrochloric acid (HCl) is a toxic and dangerous chemical. Refer to the MSDS for details of handling, storage and disposal precautions.
Only essential personnel shall be allowed in the vicinity of the acid handling equipment. Every effort shall be made, particularly thorough pre-job planning, to ensure that minimum intervention by personnel is required during the acidizing.
Safety barriers shall be used as appropriate to isolate the areas of potential hazard.
Fresh water shall be available around the pump truck. A safety shower or alternative option for washing off contamination should be available nearby.
Coiled tubing unit and all pumps must be operated by well-trained operators, and under the supervisor’s monitor.

### Attachments
Operation schedule for each sub layer
Table 11 Operation schedule for acidizing

### Equipment Layout
Figure 4 Equipment layout of High Volume Acidizing

## Section-9
PLT Operation Program

### Prepare job
Review the Job Order and all applicable down hole data provided by the customer when determining the need to lubricate the BHA out.
Check dispatch order to find is the well contain of H2S? And if it is, how much is the value in PPM (Part Per Million).
Check SCBA and EBA vessels, and make sure all of them are full charged before take them away to the well site.
Talk to witness in charge of the well that you are preparing to go about availability of reference log if he asks you to take it from main office you have to put a time to go and take it to the well site.
Perform Pre‐Job Meeting and Hazard Assessment with all services.
During check tools operation, make sure add and inject enough oil to the flow meter spinner if the bearings of spinner are dirty use DW40 to clean it then add silicon oil to it, there is a temperature chart that shows mostly in low ambient temperature use of DW40 instead of silicon oil is enough. After injection blow the air with your mouth to turn it, fins of spinner have to move smoothly.
Know which type of spinner you have to use in wellbore, type of spinner has direct portion to:
Is the well type gas well or oil well?
Production area is in open hole or case hole?
Is the well producing Sand and asphalt?
ID of open hole and case hole.
Is casing or liner has tight hole?
Well has low pressure or high pressure?
Is the well deviated well or vertical well? Notices:
If the casing or liner in wellbore has tight hole you cannot use cage spinner because whenever this
cage reach to that area will close and causes spinner to stop turning.
In deviated wells use SAT (6 Arm Spinner. It can use minimum in 5” liners and cannot run in open hole).
In low pressure production wells use smooth and much sensitive spinners.
If you are using CFS (continues flow meter spinner. Centralize it in wellbore because it doesn’t have centralizer by itself, put one caliper tool upper near the CFS, this tool mostly uses in tubing and casings due to small OD.
Another tool that you should make sure have enough oil and it’s clean is QPC tool, where there are two orifices that are sealed by two screws, first open the screws then add some silicon oil to pass
from those holes then blow to those holes by your mouth and make sure both holes are clean.
Make sure you add enough oil to the caliper tools and centralizers, use your hand and push that part.
Check insulation and continuity of 7/32” cable, before start, remove the mono cable from slip ring.
11. Simulate and test grease injector system and pumps in workshop before go to well site.

### Mobilization to Well-site
Project manager, the engineer and operators shall identify the job risks, confirm the route to well-site and brief the emergency response plan. 《Base Pre-job Safety Review》 shall
be filled up.
The senior operator identifies the job risks, confirms the route to well-site and briefs the emergency response plan.
The engineer is in charged to ensure the logging crew to reach the well-site safely. Security guard is required to the local authority while the logging team is on the way to well-site.
The driving policy of CONTRACTOR and journey management plan must be followed.

### Well-site job
Conform the well information
When logging team arrival at well-site, chief engineer talks with company and witness, and conform well information again. And get the time schedule about job.

### Pre-job meeting
Immediately upon arrival at the job site, have a meeting with the company man and rig crew regarding the logging procedure
Be sure that all the following personnel should be involved: Customer, Rig crew, CONTRACTOR personnel and all other contractor personnel.

### Well-site Operation
Spot the logging truck, crane like top schematic pic, depend on well head area adjust the positions of truck and crane.
Spool down the logging cable as spiral waves like top schematic pic.
Assign one operator to be in charge of well head and connecting the parts on it.
With cooperation of well head in charge persons (house keeper guys. Install the flange, release sub, BOP, flapper.
Notice: While connecting the release sub, cover its thread by thread protector tape (Teflon Tape).
Set up lower sheave by slings beside the well head equipment.
Pass the cable through lubricators and connect stuffing box to it.
Connect the tools and power up and check them all, check the spinner free movement and add silicon oil to the tools that needed as talks in pre job preparation procedure.
You need totally 6 points of responsibility while rig up the logging equipment as follow:
Crane operator to operate the hook and guide lubricators to the flapper head
Well head operator to connect the lubricators and hold the flapper open while RIH.
One person in charge of logging cable
One person to hold the tension cable
Hand  pump  in  charge  person  to  pump  and  catch  the  cable  inside  the  staffing  box normally logging truck driver is responsible.
Lubricator in charge person to hold and guide lubricators while standing up, this person is also responsible to remove the trolley and put the cap on bottom of lubricators.
After finish the check tools, power off and pass the PLT string through the lubricators until bottom stop upper than tool Trap-Lubricator connection.
Call hand pump in charge person to put 2000 psi pressure on the cable.
Call crane operator to slowly raise the lubricators and foreman have to walk with lubricators toward the well head fences and when the lubricators stand in vertical position he removes the trolley and put the cap in bottom of lubricators.
While lubricators are raising up engineer have to assign persons to hold tension cable, logging cable, and hand pump to make sure there will be no problem happen during rig up the tools and lubricators.
Well head operator has to adjust and connect the lubricator to the flapper top.
Command the crane operator to start the grease injection unit and raise its pressure 300psi over well head pressure.
Confirm with winch man to keep the tension on the cable and make it straight and apply zero depth to make it ready for RIH.
Tell well head operator to open the tool trap.
Confirm with well head crew to open the well head.
Call hand pump in charge person to release the tools.
Start to RIH with 5 m/min speed.
Assign well head operator to shake the wire line cable.
After passing the well head you can increase the speed to 10 m/min.
near no go point keep speed on 10 m/min or less.
After passing critical points increase the speed less than70m/min in casing, it depends on the well bore condition.
Notice:
Do not increase the winch speed more than 30m/min open hole, perforation and production zones; it could result on spinner damage.
After finishing pass logs and stationary points, depend on witness, POOH to the surface.
Again near no go area decrease the speed to 10 m/min or less.
About 50 meter near the well head again decrease the speed to 5m/min and tell one operator to shake the wire line cable near the ground, in case of stuck the cable will raise and you can find there is a problem and stop POOH.
Assign one person to observe the tool trap whenever the tools enter the lubricators it will close and you will find the tools are already in lubricators.
Immediately the well head operator has to tell the winch driver to stop the movement.
Call well head crew to close the well.
Now turn off grease injection unit.
Release the trapped pressure by opening the release valve, make sure there is no extra pressure is trapped inside the equipment.
Tell hand pump in charge person to increase the hand pump pressure to 2000 psi and catch the cable by this way on stuffing box.
Now well head operator has to open the lubricator –flapper connection and crane operator should lift up the lubricators.
While the lubricators are laying down one operator have to be in charge of putting trolley on bottom of the lubricators.
In case of spinner damage, you have to totally change the spinner in accordance with borehole condition.

### Record Data
PLT data interpretation, Uses 4 different speeds, like 10, 20, 30, 40 m/min . The speed can be change due to hole condition and running tools operation.
Stationary check (Stop Check) based on perforation zones or production intervals.

### Post job
Delivery the log data and log print to the clients.
Maintenance all the trucks lubricator and down hole tools.

### 9.4	Equipment List
Table 12 PLT down hole tool list
Table 13 PLT surface equipment list

## Section-10 Logistics

### Introduction
Ramshir oil ﬁeld is located at a distance of 60 km of the city of Ahvaz. Because of multiple military operations the city is very hurt, therefore it’s deprive in terms of economic and providing Logistics necessary is so difficult.

### QHSE
All matters relating to the movement of personnel and cargo, and so on will be according to CONTRACTOR QHSE rules and regulations.

### Access
To access Ramshir, need entrance permit. To apply permit, the request must be submitted 3 days before for local staﬀ and 2 weeks before for foreign staﬀ and announced to CONTRACTOR logistics team. Communicating time starts from 6 am to 8 pm, and other than the mentioned hours, the gate is closed, except in times of emergency with PASARGAD Base Manager written request.

### Transfer of staff
There is no local airport in Mehran. The closest airports in order of priority are:
Ahwaz: The approximate distance of airport to Ramshir ﬁeld is 50 km. 1 to 1:30 hours by car on ﬂat road.
Tehran: The approximate distance of Tehran to Ramshir ﬁeld is 900 km. 12 hours by car.

### Logistics availability
A local employee hired for logistics.
Two pickups were purchased. Both have been deployed in the Ahvaz.
Prepared a  guest  house  in  Mehran  and  accommodates  for  6  people  as  per  CONTRACTOR standard.
Required land for camp needs to be cleaned, and whole area needs to be aligned, all requirements is in progress. This land is around 14000 Sq.mtr. 6000 Sq.mtr dedicated for camp. Other area dedicated for CONTRACTOR to store chemicals and equipment.
Transportation service of CONTRACTOR’s equipment will provided
Accommodation  of  max.  50  employees  in  camp  &  rig  site  from  PASARGAD,  CONTRACTOR  and subcontractors.
Supplying fuel and water, required for camp and rig in progress.
Planning for operation requirements during rig-less activities

### Logistics main activities
Providing guest house for CONTRACTOR personnel
As  there  is  not  such  facility  in  Mehran  area,  guest  house  with  6  persons  capacity  is prepared in Mehran
Providing transportation services
Contract with third party company in area to provide transporting services for personnel in site for different location such as well site and camp.
Providing transportation services for material and equipment.
As per contract, transporting of equipment and material from client yard to well site and vice versa will be performed by CONTRACTOR logistics team.
Transporting of equipment and material from service companies’ yard to Well Site.
Request for permission for personnel and cars
All required permission for CONTRACTOR team and service company’s personnel will be applied and proceeded by logistic team
Providing fuel and water
As per contract providing fuel and water is under service companies responsibility but CONTRACTOR logistic team will assist the process
Responsible for proper handover of location.
Providing warehouse for contractors in site.

## Section‐11 Hand Over of the Well

### (Well handover will be in accordance to the coordination procedure)

## Annex‐1 Well Completion Data
A2.1 Well Completion Casing
A3.1.Annulus pressure monitoring
Annulus pressure monitoring while operation on different well sections shall be carefully conducted on annulus valves for annulus pressures build up which can be resulted from annulus in-situ fluid expansion and or leakage (of wellhead packing, packer, tubing, casing and etc.).
To perform annulus pressure monitoring a dedicated operator should be assigned to record every 30minutes. If the pressure behavior was abnormal, operator may record every 15 minutes or even less, and if well behavior was normal recording me sequence may be increased to every 60 mins or more. It should be noted that if the pressure behavior was abnormal and it was necessary to release the pressure, there would be high risk of H2S presence in released gas, so all safety precautions shall be followed by dedicated operator. To release the pressure, Client should be informed and the work shall be conducted in the presence of
second witness which shall witness the job from a safe distance. Operator shall be equipped with full face
mask and portable H2S detector.
In the case of any alarms from detector, all operations shall be stopped, the well be closed and secured, dedicated operator should come out of cellar and finally all possibilities and reasons of leakage and resulted pressure buildup should be reviewed and evaluated. If related well integrity logs be required it should to be run and remedial actions and activities shall be performed.
Though the well cellar is defined as confined space and possibility of H2S presence in that area is high, based on OSHA standard all safety precautions in confine space shall be addressed.

### A3.2.Wellhead and X-mas tree monitoring
During any operation the condition of wellhead and x-mas tree will be monitored and if any hazard, especially during lifting of equipment (e.g. lifting BOPs and lubricators for logging) was observed, clear instruction will be given to crane operator, rigger and logging operator. The physical condition of the well will be monitored and if during any operations oil, grease, dirt and etc. be observed all of them will be removed by non-flammable cleaner. (Suitable detergent) At delivery time of the well to Client, the well condition will be the same as delivery time from Client to Contractor.

### A3.3.Cellar Monitoring
Cellar shall be free of any rain water, oil, grease and cellulosic material so, before any job it will be cleaned and if any cellulosic material was observed they will be removed and dumped in a safe waste basket. During operation if the cellar be contaminated by rain water, oil and grease they will be removed by vacuum truck. The stair way of the cellar does not have any ladder so, if any entrance to the cellar be required, the dedicated operator will be inform and trained about the hazard. Since, presence of poisonous gas (H2S) is possible in the cellar which is a confined space the operator will be equipped will full face mask and portable H2S detector. At delivery time of the well to Client, the cellar condition will be the same as delivery time from Client to Contractor.

### A3.4.Well path and well area
If during any operation any material like oil and grease which makes the area slippery they will be removed. If well path be damaged due to any operation, the damage will be repaired after the job. At delivery time of the well to Client, the well path and well area condition will be the same as delivery time from Client to Contractor.

## Section‐12 Corrosion Logging

### GENERAL DESCRIPTION
Scope  of  Work  covers  the  general  obligations  and  responsibilities  concerning  the  Work  to  be rendered by Contractor to Company under a lump-sum Contract.
The  Work  consists  of  provision  of  corrosion  logging  (Multi  Finger  Calliper  (MFC)  and  Magnetic Thickness Detector (MTD)) in 10 wells.
(1.1.) Contractor shall maintain a Local Base with sufficient yard, workshop and warehouse facilities for Contractor’s Items and mobilise and demobilise Personnel and equipment in good working order to and from Contractor’s Local Base which shall be identified by Contractor.
(1.2.) The Contractor shall direct, supervise, and control corrosion logging (MTD, MFC) and associated operations, and assist with running of down hole tools and services as defined herein and assume liabilities as provided in this Contract. All steps, details and results of planning, design and programming must be confirmed by SAED authorized representatives. Consequently Contractor shall:
Execute the operations further defined in at the Well Location(s) in accordance with the Work Program.
Furnish all equipment, labor, materials, and Services necessary to perform the Work. Preparing the list of all necessary tools, equipment, and materials for all sections of the procedure.
Ensure that all Services under its management are developed and executed to a satisfactory standard and comply with the requirements of the specifications, unless covered by a specific variation.
Provide workshop, and sufficient yard and warehouse facilities, including warehouse management, capable of handling and storing Contractor Items at Local Base.
Keep and furnish to Company all records and reports detailed further.
Perform quality assurance and quality control testing on Contractor supplied materials and the reporting of results as part of the job proposal.
Have in place before the Commencement Date the documentation as specified in the Contract.
Providing all necessary services such as (but not limited to): wire-line, slick-line, H2S services, liquid pumping unit. Providing necessary engineering and operation assistance to SAED petroleum engineers for above-mentioned services.
Providing lodging facilities, Mobile camp and catering in oilfield for all persons of contractor’s
Contractor shall be solely responsible for the operation of Contractor Items including but not limited to the moving, testing, running of Contractor Items.
Contractor shall provide assistance to Company and other Contractors performing Services relating to the Work.
Upon the Termination of a Call-Out or the Contract, Contractor's Personnel shall prepare, pack, and secure Contractor Items and assist in preparing, packing and securing Company Items for transportation from the Well Location to their designated destination.

### WELL LOCATION
(2.1) Well Preparation
Contractor shall be responsible for positioning Services equipment in relation to Company’s location (e.g. Well Location, if applicable etc.) ensuring that all interface requirements of services unit and well location can be met.
(2.2.) Waste
Contractor shall do waste management with the segregation and collection and transfer and disposal of waste
(2.3.) Access Control
Contractor shall adhere to the IP hazardous area classification and shall be responsible for controlling the access of people and equipment into hazardous areas involving the Work within the Well Location and controlling access on and to the Well Location.
Contractor shall only access the Sites on the access roads provided by Company.

### MOBILIZATION
(3.1.)       General
Mobilization shall include all necessary actions involved in mobilising Contractor's Personnel, equipment, and materials to be transported by Contractor required performing the Work at Commencement Date.
(3.2.)       Mobilization Services
The Mobilization of Services comprises setting up of a Local Base, mobilization of continuously available exclusive use and Call-out materials, equipment and Personnel to Local Base, recruiting and training of local Personnel and all other planning activities required to adequately plan the execution of Scope of the Work.
Contractor shall be required to provide one-off lump sum mobilization costs.
During the mobilization period, Contractor shall ascertain, in conjunction with Company, the required resource levels at Commencement Date to meet the requirements of the initial stages of the project.
Contractor shall make available, at its cost, manpower to upgrade or change the Quality and HSE Manuals, Programmes and Plans in accordance with HSE standards and with guidance from Company.
Mobilization of equipment from one well pad to another one is free of charge. The Mobilization of all Services shall be completed when:
all Contractor Items are officially imported,
all documentation required for the Contract has been approved by Company,
After a commissioning and inspection of the main equipment and ancillary equipment in order to establish if all equipment is accounted for and to establish if the equipment is functioning to its requirements and is complete to start operations on the first well. This process shall be witnessed by Company. Completion of the Mobilization of all Services requires acceptance by Company.
(3.3.)       Mobilization of Additional Personnel, Materials and Equipment
Company  can  request  mobilization  of  additional  field  Personnel,  additional  materials  and  additional equipment other than specified items any time after the effective date of this Contract.
Contractor shall mobilise additional field Personnel, additional materials and additional equipment other than specified Appendix within the mutual agreed period between Company and Contractor. All additional equipment costs that are not mentioned in Contract table of costs shall be calculated based on mutual agreement.

### OPERATIONS SCOPE OF WORK
(4.1.)        General
Contractor  shall  execute  the  operations  on  the  Well  Location(s)  in  accordance  with  the  specifications contained herein. Contractor’s Site Representatives shall be familiar with these documents.
Contractor shall undertake:
The operation of Contractor Items within the operating limits of the tools as specified in Appendices; the operation of Contractor Items outside the operating limit shall not be without Company consent;
All the operation services including pumping, wire-line, logging and etc.
The supply of the requisite quantity and quality of chemical additives, and other associated equipment to be timely on Site to perform the Work;
To assist, to the best of its ability, Other Contractors with delivering an optimum level of performance.
(4.2.)        Local Base Services
Contractor shall render services to ensure optimum quality Wells with minimal Well cost through active participation in Well planning, execution and review. To that effect a dedicated project Co-
ordinator shall be assigned to Company in Contractor’s Local Base. The Co-ordinator, shall be responsible for:
Assistance with the preparation of specific parts of Company Well proposals and Work Program for Company. In particular the Co-ordinator shall prepare for each Well an operation proposal.
Assistance in the compiling of cost estimates involving Contractor’s Services for screening, planning or budgetary purposes.
Provision  of  engineering  support  to  Company  by  using  Contractor’s  available  expertise, databases and computer modelling programmes.
Attend  progress  meetings  and  operational  meetings  on  a  more  frequent  basis  when problems are experienced
Act as the focal point for all technologies and Services provided in Contract.
keep Company updated on new developments of technologies and Services and suggest new and cost effective methods of applying.
Compilation of detailed reports accurately and expediently as requested by Company.
act as QA and HSE focal point for Contractor’s Services and attend monthly performance and HSE meetings.
coach local recruits and prepare training programs;
Co-ordinate inquiries for third party equipment and services;
Co-ordinate logistics and importation of tools with Company, of which the planning should start in time to mobilise the required Contractor Items for optimal performance.
generate incentive proposals for Company;
Actively participate in search of improving project economics.
Contractor shall nominate and publish a structured rotation of key Personnel to act as a focal point for out of hours contact for routine operational matters. The focal point shall be contactable twenty four (24) hours per day by pager and/or mobile phone.

### WORK PROGRAMME
(5.1.)	Corrosion Logging
Company shall provide to Contractor a Well proposal including a Well schematic, reservoir pressures and temperatures and other information that Company considers relevant for Contractor to prepare as specified
in Appendix, compile and submit a Work Program for corrosion services before the scheduled start of operations to Company.
(5.2.)        SPECIFICATIONS
(5.2.1.)     General
The following Specifications shall be complie by Contractor. All specifications shall be subject to approval by the Company Representative. Specifications for the major services are outlined below.
These Specifications may be altered for each Well as stated in the Work Programme.
In an event that new equipment or service is not covered in the price list, usage of such equipment or Service shall be agreed between Company and Contractor in advance.
(5.2.2.)     Acceptance
Performance of the Work in accordance with the Work Program shall be subject to Acceptance by Company. Contractor  shall  maintain  written  records  of  the  values  of  the  Work  Program.  These  records  shall  be
submitted to Company for signature by Company Representative. Such signature shall confirm that the values have fulfilled the requirements of the program. This documented acceptance of fulfilment is to be signed by Company Representative and will be recorded at a frequency which is adequate for realistic control of the Work Program in question, and will be a necessary element of supporting documentation for payment of invoices.
(5.2.3.)     Pressure Tests
Test pressures shall be applied for at least fifteen (15) minutes and the acceptable pressure drop over this period is 10% of the initial pressure.
All pressure tests to be carried out using water and recorded on pressure charts. A record to be kept of the volume required  to obtain the test pressure, and of the volume returned, when bleeding off.
Required pressure for pressure testing will be mentioned on site by company supervisor.

### RECORDS AND REPORTS
Contractor  shall  plan,  monitor,  control  and  report  regularly,  and  at  agreed  frequency,  the  operational progress of any Work as a total project with suitable schedule diagrams and reporting formats.
Additional relevant Well data provided by Other Contractors shall be added to Contractor's reports at no additional costs to Company if Company so requires.
The following accurate reports of the progress of the Work shall be submitted by Contractor to the Company Representative:
(6.1.) Daily operation report
Detailed operation steps, records, main results and material balance of pumpable and consumable fluids shall be reported at the end of every operation day at 12:00PM in an acceptable format.
(6.2.)        End of Job Report
Two weeks after end of operation, Contractor shall provide End-of-Well Report which includes operation summary, and actual performed job, failure reports, and all the performed operations.
(6.3.)        Daily Tickets / Field Tickets
During operations longer than three (3) days, daily tickets for services shall be submitted for each day and signed by both Contractor and Company Site Representatives, detailing times during which Work was undertaken. All operation details shall be mentioned for payment settlement. A field ticket shall be issued by Contractor upon completions of each job and associated Services jobs.
(6.4.)        Accident and Incident Report
In collaboration with the Company Representative, Contractor shall investigate immediately any accident. The extent of investigation shall be determined by Company provided incident potential matrix. Contractor shall keep a record of near misses.
(6.5.)        Equipment Inspection Report
Equipment inspection reports shall be submitted to Company Representative after each inspection. (6.6.)	Calibration reports
Tool Calibration reports shall be submitted to Company Representative after each Calibration.

### DOCUMENT FORMATS
(7.1.)        General
General formats for reporting of various works to be performed shall be agreed between Company and Contractor. In the event that Company finds Contractor's standard report forms unacceptable, a Company format will be adopted or a new format developed.
(7.2.)        Functional performance
Company shall monitor functional  Performance. To this end, Company shall  provide Contractor with a format in which to enter performance related information in line with other companies, and that is required to be submitted on a monthly basis.

### QUALITY, HEALTH, SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENT
Contractor shall comply with Health, Safety, Environmental, Security, Community, QA / QC, and Personnel Training Policies, Procedures and Requirements of the Contract and shall implement a formal system for the management of health and safety. Such system shall describe clearly the organizational responsibility and the procedural arrangements required for achieving the Contractor's statements contained therein.

[جدول 1]
BHA | Bottom Hole Assembly
BHP | Bottom Hole Pressure
BHS | Bottom Hole Sampling
BHT | Bottom Hole Temperature
BOP | Blow Out Preventer
BPM | Barrel Per Minute
BPV | Back Pressure Valve
BSW | Basic Solid&Water
CBL | Cement Bound Log
CH | Cased Hole
CHH | Casing Head Housing
CMT | Cement
CSG | Casing
CT | Coil Tubing
DC | Drill Collar
DP | Drill Pipe
ESD | Emergency Shut Down System
SWHP | Shut in Wellhead Pressure
FWHP | Flowing Wellhead Pressure
FWHT | Flowing Wellhead Temperature
GOR | Gas Oil Ratio
GLR | Gas to Liquid Ratio
GPM | Gallon per Minute
HGR | Hanger
HSD | High Shut Density
HSE | Health, Safety and Environment
HSEQ | Health, Safety, Environment and Quality
ID | Inside Diameter
Kips | Kilo PSI
KPI | Key Performance Indicators
L/D | Lay Down
Lb | Mass pound
LDC | Latch Down Collar
MDD | Meter Drillers Depth
MSDS | Material Safety Data Sheet
MT | Meters
MU | Make up
MW | Mud Weight
NA | Not Applicable
ND | Nipple down
NIOC | National Iran Oil Company

[جدول 2]
NPT | Non‐Productive Time
NU | Nipple up
OD | Outside diameter
CONTRACTOR | Overseas Technical Services. Kish
OEIC | Oil Industries Engineering Company
OH | Open Hole
P/U | Pick Up
PBU | Pressure Buildup
pcf | Pound per Cubic Feet
PLT | Production Logging Tool
POOH | Pull out of Hole
ppb | Pound per barrel
PPE | Personal Protective Equipment
PSI | Pound per Square Inch
PSV | Pressure Safety Valve
R/B | Rack Back
RIH | Run in Hole
RPM | Round per Minute
SG | Specific Gravity
SRPM | Surface Round per Minute
SCBA | Self-Contained Breathing Apparatus
SRS | Single‐phase Reservoir sampler
SSB | Single‐phase Sampling Bottle
SSD | Side Sliding Door
SST | Surface Test Tree
SSSV | Sub‐Surface Safety Valve
SSV | Surface Safety Valve
STB | Standard Barrel
STBD | Standard Barrel per day
SWL | Safe Working Load
TBG | Tubing
TD | Total Depth
THS | Tubing Head Spool
TOL | Top of Liner
TVD | True Vertical Depth
UTM | Universal Traverse Mercator
VDL | Variable Density Log
WH | Well Head
VDA | Viscoelastic Diverting Acid
VES | Viscoelastic Surfactant
WL | Wire Line
WOP | Weight on Bit

[جدول 3]
No | Formation | Interval(m) | Gross Thickness(m) | Permeability(md) | Porosity (%)
1 | Asmari | 2205-2335 | 130 |  | 

[جدول 4]
No. | Procedure description | Fluid name | Stage fluid Volume (gals) | Pump rate
1 | RIH CT to End of perforations | Water/diesel | 1000 | As less as possible
2 | Hold on CT @ end of perforations and displace | Water/diesel | Will be determined | 1bpm
 | POOH CT to surface | Water/diesel | 1000 | As less as possible

[جدول 5]
Gun Type | OD | Shot density | Phasing | Max Pressure | Perforation charge
2” HSD | 50.8mm(2in) | 16SPM(5SPF) | 72︒ | 20000psi | 2”65T Zoobin shaped charge
2 1/8”TTP carrier | 54mm(21/8in) | 6SPF | 40︒ | 20000psi | 105DP26HMX-40-54
2 1/8”Enerjet carrier | 54mm(2 1/8in) | 6SPF | 45︒ | 20000psi | Zhoobin enerjet Shaped charge 2-1/8”
2 7/8” HSD | 73mm (2 7/8”) | 6SPF | 60︒ | 20000psi | 692D-54R-173HMX-2 7/8” Charge

[جدول 6]
1. GENERAL SAFETY ANALYSIS | 
1.1 TRAFFIC AND TRANSPORTIONS | 
JOB SAFETY ANALYSIS | POTENTIAL HAZARDS | RECOMMENDED ACTION OR PROCEDURE | 
Traffic hazard | Traffic accident | Drivers must flow the CONTRACTOR traffic safety regulations | 
Traffic hazard | Traffic accident | Any over speed is not permitted | 
Traffic hazard | Traffic accident | Check truck before mobilization | 

[جدول 7]
 |  | Check lubricators, diesel and cooler water before mobilization and once per day | 
1.2 ELECTRIC POWER | 
JOB SAFETY ANALYSIS | POTENTIAL HAZARDS | RECOMMENDED ACTION OR PROCEDURE | 
Electric hazard | Electric leak get man hurt and testing fail | To check all power line and transfer before moving and logging. | 
Electric hazard | Electric leak get man hurt and testing fail | Ground cable should keep good connection during the logging. | 
Electric hazard | Electric leak get man hurt and testing fail | To protect power cable from unexpected broken. | 
1.3 Fire | 
JOB SAFETY ANALYSIS | POTENTIAL HAZARDS | RECOMMENDED ACTION OR PROCEDURE | 
Logging unit/well/living room | Fire | To check all power line and the switch every day | 
Logging unit/well/living room | Fire | No smoking in the logging unit | 
Logging unit/well/living room | Fire | check the vehicle carefully | 
Logging unit/well/living room | Fire | To prepare the extinguisher and keep the good condition | 
2. WL LOGGING OPERATION SAFETY ANALYSIS | 
2.1 PREPARATION AT BASE | 
JOB SAFETY ANALYSIS | POTENTIAL HAZARDS | RECOMMENDED ACTION OR PROCEDURE | 
To check all equipment | Quality Downtime Road risk Stick | Cable and collector (broken and safety force) Weak point All surface panels Hoist and generator Logging truck chassis and engine Measuring depth device .load cell cables .rig up equipment (sheave. chain. pin.) All the spare parts for operation(grease paper silicon oil sample ) fishing tools | Checked the salm/fmt/dev;  Follow the checklist to prepare the auxiliary stuff
To prepare the cable head | Personal Injury, damage of equipment | Use complete PPE and use proper tools. Follow the SOP. | Prepared three cable heads
To check the tools | Personal Injury, damage of equipment | Use complete PPE and keep the area clean and tidy. Follow the SOP. Pay attention to the new operators. | 
To load tools to the truck | Tools fall can cause injury | Cooperation each other, Good communication and organization. Proper PPE. | Fixed the tools by rope and rubber rings

[جدول 8]
2.2 MOBILIZATION/(ON ROAD) | 
JOB SAFETY ANALYSIS | POTENTIAL HAZARDS | RECOMMENDED ACTION OR PROCEDURE | 
Vehicles | Drive fast/bad driving habit/by accident | Limited speed and keep distance between the vehicles. Good training for the driver. The drivers keep good body and psychology condition. Check the vehicle every  hour on the road. | 
Tools | Tools can fall down from the truck | Fix the tools carefully and check every hour. | 
Battle and terrorist raid | Injury, Lost, Death | Emergency plan for the war is available. Everybody knows how to do. | 
Sand and dust | Can cause accident | Follow the traffic rules. | Slow down or stop when two vehicles meet
2.3 RIG UP AND RIG DOWN | 
JOB SAFETY ANALYSIS | POTENTIAL HAZARDS | RECOMMENDED ACTION OR PROCEDURE | 
Connect/disconnect the logging tools | The tools/spanner fall down. Damage of the tools pin/connection site. | Low hoist speed Proper torque setting Follow SOP. Skilled operator. Proper check. Operating carefully. Good illumination. Proper the spanner. Good body and psychology condition. Good communication between the hoist driver and the operators. | 
Spool cable | 1.Measuring depth device damage  2.Injury | Low hoist speed  Proper torque setting.  Remove the cable from Measuring device | 
Sheave | In jury  Fall down/broken/damage tools or cable | Don’t touch using hands Follow SOP. Skilled operator.  Proper fittings.  Operating carefully.  Check T-bar condition.  Good body and psychology condition. | 
Chain | Broken/improper site/size | Check it, if not good, replace it.  Experienced operator. | 

[جدول 9]
 |  | Locked it by U-clamp.  Enough long (fit to derrick). | 
Heavy tools | Hitting and pressing injury, Fracture, Death/damage of the tools | Use the good U-clamp and the tools cap. Good illumination for everyone, especially for the hoist driver. Good cooperation among everybody. | 
Check the tools | Injury/damage of tools/leakage of the source/lost of the source | Use complete PPE. Follow SOP. Do step by step. Skilled operators. | 
Mud | Skin, corrosion | Wear the proper PPE. Clean the tools adequately. Spray the oil to the cable. | 
2.4 OPERATIONS | 
JOB SAFETY ANALYSIS | POTENTIAL HAZARDS | RECOMMENDED ACTION OR PROCEDURE | 
Well flow | Well flow/Tool Lost | Do the BOP pressure test before the job. Make sure the control module is in good working condition. Make grease full in both tanks. Arrange special person to monitor the well head pressure and well flow. Adjust the grease injection pressure according to the well head pressure.  If well flow happen, close the BOP Immediately and inform the Supervisor to conduct well control action. Cut the cable and close the vulvae of the production tree in emergency if necessary. | 
H2S | H2S Hurt/Dead | Everyone in the well site wear the H2S detector. Prepare enough SCBA. Check the H2S Detectors and SCBA to make sure they are in good condition. Training for using the H2S Detectors and SCBA properly should be conducted before the job.  Use the Wind indicator to identify the wind direction. All the operation should be conducted in the upwind direction. Set 2 muster point for emergency.  Before opening the well, make sure the pressure in the BOP pipe has dropped to zero, the residue in the BOP pipe should be discharged in a special oil barrel. | 
Bridge/Stuck | Tools damage or lost. Business problem. ….. | Adjust the torque every 500m,especially near well head | 
Bridge/Stuck | Tools damage or lost. Business problem. ….. | Set the proper max tension and different tension on SDDP panel. | 
Bridge/Stuck | Tools damage or lost. Business problem. ….. | watch the tension all the time | 
Bridge/Stuck | Tools damage or lost. Business problem. ….. | See the curve or data all the time | 
Bridge/Stuck | Tools damage or lost. Business problem. ….. | To prevent sticking, the engineer must carefully plan his job, determining the conditions of the well, choosing the right weak point and equipment, and adapting his speed and technique to run in and pull out safely. | 
Bridge/Stuck | Tools damage or lost. Business problem. ….. | After perforation, guns can get stuck at tubing shoe, control the speed near tubing shoe, use the special cable head with a chamfer angle. | 
Bridge/Stuck | Tools damage or lost. Business problem. ….. | Sticking can occur in damaged or collapsed casing. The casing shoe is the most vulnerable part of the casing string and the part most liable to get damaged. | 

[جدول 10]
 |  | Cable that has become knotted, birdcages or has broken armor wires can quite easily become stuck. The main cause of knotted or damaged cable is a lack of tension while in the hole. If the cable is old or in bad condition then the chance of breaking an armor wire is good, particularly if the cable is subjected to rough treatment. | 
 |  | The breaking strength and safe working load of new cables and used cables. | 
 |  | It must be strong enough to normally carry the tools involved until we desire to pull free, but we also must be able to break it normally within the 50% rating of the cable in use. | 
 |  | Maintain an accurate tension device, and calibrate the panel before each job. | 
 |  | Train yourself and your crew to monitor and periodically record the tension device readings going down and coming up (use the center-tension feature). This is the only meaningful way of determining what the normal tension is; once you are stuck it is too late. | 
 |  | RIH with proper tension on the cable. Stop periodically to determine the ``static'' tension. | 
 |  | Always keep tension on the cable (i.e. do not put too much slack on bottom.) | 
 |  | Be alert for bottom, and pick up quickly. If picking up from bottom tends to stick the tool, do not touch bottom again. Never stop longer than is absolutely necessary. | 
Logging Data | Data Lost | Backup the Data after logging ASAP. | 
2.5 POST-JOB AND DEMOBILIZATION | 
JOB SAFETY ANALYSIS | POTENTIAL HAZARDS | RECOMMENDED ACTION OR PROCEDURE | 
Vehicles | Drive fast can cause collusion | Speed in limit and keep distance between two vehicles. | 
Hoisting tools | Hitting injury, Fracture | Refer to emergency plan for hoisting working risk | 
Fluid in the tools | Environmental pollution | Environmental pollution control procedure during well logging. | 
Sand and dust | Cough, Dyspnoea | Wear earplug, respirator, goggles etc.if it is necessary. | 

[جدول 11]
Valve Description | Position (closed or opened)
Swab valve | Closed

[جدول 12]
No | ITEM/ACTIVITY | Hazard/Issue | Consequence | Barriers/Controls | Comments/Reference | Additional/Recommend ation/Action
1 | Equipment Handling/Lifting | Dropping Equipment & moving objects | Damage to people and equipment | Enforcement of lifting procedures close-off area, stay clear, | Only trained personnel to perform certain jobs | Refer to CONTRACTOR (CNLC) testing procedure
 |  | Slings | As above | Only use proper slings | Stay clear | Check certificate
2 | Pressure Testing | Surface equipment(incl . slickline and wireline lubricator) | Pressure release projectile | Proper procedures, exclusion zones, only absolutely necessary staff in area, communication | Refer to testing programme | CONTRACTOR (CNLC) to perform; Yada test engineer to witness, Radio communication provided by CONTRACTOR (CNLC)
3 | Slickline and wireline operation | Work at height, dropped equipment and objects | Falling equipment, malfunction and injury from split wire | Only assigned personnel to work on rig floor. PPE, procedures | CONTRACTOR (CNLC) policy and procedure; supervision | No crane operation near line and walking under line; mark line pass to rig floor
4 | Flow | H2S fire, | Potential serious | Check of fire fighting | Wind direction and | Good communication
 | well/Production | explosion, sampling,chem ical injection | injury or death. damage to environment and equipment | procedure and equipment, check H2S system and equipment. full drills for both prior starting test operation. ensure doctor is fully aware of testing operation, move non-essential crew to camp. No phones/No smoking in testing area | strength to be monitored. If wind strength gets too strong during testing, shut- in the well. ensure all relevant personnel are conversant with the ESD procedure and equipment. | between all personnel is critical. Chain of command to be discussed prior to flow. Number of people on rig site should be limited to absolute minimum. The flare has to be  monitored all the times. Information to local. Wear BA during sampling operations
 |  | Welding & crane operation | Explosion; Dropping equipment on pressurized lines | PTW & signal giving | Refer to testing programme | No crane operation no hot works without permission
 |  | Ignition of flare | Malfunction | Check before test | Flare watch | Prepare appropriate buckets with cloths and water to be put under end of flare line
 |  | Leakage / spills | Environmental damage | Small spills to be dealt with by rig/CONTRACTOR( CNLC) | P/T equipment prior to test | Refer to testing programme, especially with regard to H2S
5 | Shut-in well | pressure | Uncontrolled pressure release, blow-out | Rig crew & all relevant personnel to familiarize themselves with pipe work/manifold/layout . Especially the control of valve & gauges | On short notice in emergency case | Number of people on rig site should be limited to minimum; have kill procedure at hand in order to be able to act quickly in case of equipment failure
6 | Handling diesel | Fire, spills | Personal injury from fire and skin contact, explosion, environmental damage | Supervision & communication | Flow diesel to flare pit for burning when well starts flowing | Need to check fire extinguishers, place powder fire extinguisher near testing equipment
7 | Escape & evacuation | Panic, blocked exits | Personal injury | Only key personnel on rig during flow testing; training & drills | Ensure people are trained and all exits are clear | Properly maintain T- card board at rig site entrance

[جدول 13]
Action taken on emergency | Personnel duty (1) | Personnel duty (2)
Shut down ESD | Day shift |  | 
Shut down ESD | Night shift |  | 
Close choke manifold | Day shift |  | 
Close choke manifold | Night shift |  | 
Shut down Super Safety valve | Day shift |  | 
Shut down Super Safety valve | Night shift |  | 
Shut down down-hole tester Valve | Day shift |  | 
Shut down down-hole tester Valve | Night shift |  | 
Rescuer | Day shift | 
Rescuer | Night shift | 

[جدول 14]
Item | Specifications | Quantity
Surface Test Equipment
1 | Surface Safety Valve  3" ID X 15,000psi WP, Temp -4 – 250 deg F Miscell. equipment | 1
2 | Generator | 2
3 | Miscell. Equipment | 1 set

[جدول 15]
4 | ESD system | 1
5 | Piping Sections  3" ID X 10,000 / 5,000 psi WP, Temp -4 – 250 degF  Suitable for H2S & CO2 , corrosive service | 1
6 | Choke Manifold  3" ID x 15,000 psi WP, Temp -4 -250 deg F Suitable for H2S & CO2 , corrosive service | 1
7 | Data Header  3"ID, inlet: 15,000 psi WP, Temp -4 – 250 deg F Suitable for H2S & CO2 , corrosive service | 2
8 | Horizontal Test Separator  3"ID, inlet: 1440 psi WP, Temp - 4 – 212 deg F Suitable for H2S & CO2 , corrosive service | 1
9 | 100 BBLS Surge Tank  3"ID, inlet / outlet: 50 psi WP, Temp - 4 – 212 deg F Suitable for H2S & CO2 , corrosive service | 1
10 | Gauge tank  16m3 | 1
11 | Transfer Pump  3"ID, inlet / 2” outlet: 300 psi WP, Temp 32 – 212 deg F Suitable for H2S & CO2 , corrosive service | 1
12 | Air Compressor  Diesel  engine  driven  air  compressor  with  adequate  air  hose,  Rated (minimum) 400SCF/min at 120psi. | 2 sets

[جدول 16]
9 | PVT cylinder 15Kpsi, H2S service | 4
10 | Electronic memory Gauge 15K Psi, 170°C, H2S service | 6

[جدول 17]
13 | Computerised surface data Acquisition System complete with all accessories and equipment. | 1
14 | Well site laboratory | 1
15 | Chemical Injection Skid 17,000psi | 1
16 | Gas and oil manifold | 1 set
17 | Burner Max.Capacity:14,000BOPD. | 1 set
Slickline Service Equipment/Tools
1 | Slick Line Unit 0.108″slickline H2S service | 1
2 | Dual BOP  3″ ID,H2S,10kpsi | 1
3 | Stuffing Box  3″ ID,H2S,10kpsi | 1
4 | Lubricator  8 ft,3″ ID,H2S,10kpsi | 4
5 | 1-7/8” String Components | 1 set
6 | PVT Bottom Hole Sampler  600 cc capacity, 1.69” OD,15kpsi, H2S service | 4
7 | Site Sampler Transfer Unit | 1
8 | Tool catcher  3″ ID,H2S,10kpsi | 1

[جدول 18]
No. | Procedure description | Pump rate (bpm) | Fluid Volume  (bbl.) | Acid Accum  (bbl.) | Est. Time  (min) | Remark
1 | 1. RIH CT to TD  with pumping water/diesel, tag CT at TD | 0.1 | 20 |  |  | Displace, low rate
2 | Hold  CT 5m above   TD with pumping water/diesel | 1 | 30 |  | 50 | Displace, high rate
3 | Displacing acid and pull CT | 1 | 30 | 30 | 30 | Displace, high rate
4 | POOH CT to top of perforation with pumping acid | 1 | 20 | 50 | 10 | Displace, high rate
5 | POOH  CT 200 m above perforations with pumping water/diesel | 1 | 20 |  | 20 | Displace, high rate
6 | Bullhead Water/diesel by CT & killlinenote1 | 1 | 50 |  | 100 | Close choke
7 | POOH CT to surface, Flow back and recycle diesel. | 0.2 | 10 |  | 150 | Open Choke

[جدول 19]
No. | Pump rate (bpm) | Fluid Volume (bbl.) | Accum (bbl.) | Est. Time (min) | Remark

[جدول 20]
1 | 0.5 | 2 | 2 | 4 | When pumping pressure stable for about 30s, pump rate may go to the next step. When WHP near WHP limit(psi) listed below, it is better decrease to a lower pump rate ,and go to bullheading by tubing. When obvious fractured ,stop pumping. When near WHP limit and the pump rate less than 5bpm, re- perforation is recommend. PASARGAD will pay for this extra charge.
2 | 1 | 3 | 5 | 3 | When pumping pressure stable for about 30s, pump rate may go to the next step. When WHP near WHP limit(psi) listed below, it is better decrease to a lower pump rate ,and go to bullheading by tubing. When obvious fractured ,stop pumping. When near WHP limit and the pump rate less than 5bpm, re- perforation is recommend. PASARGAD will pay for this extra charge.
3 | 2 | 6 | 11 | 3 | When pumping pressure stable for about 30s, pump rate may go to the next step. When WHP near WHP limit(psi) listed below, it is better decrease to a lower pump rate ,and go to bullheading by tubing. When obvious fractured ,stop pumping. When near WHP limit and the pump rate less than 5bpm, re- perforation is recommend. PASARGAD will pay for this extra charge.
4 | 4 | 12 | 23 | 3 | When pumping pressure stable for about 30s, pump rate may go to the next step. When WHP near WHP limit(psi) listed below, it is better decrease to a lower pump rate ,and go to bullheading by tubing. When obvious fractured ,stop pumping. When near WHP limit and the pump rate less than 5bpm, re- perforation is recommend. PASARGAD will pay for this extra charge.
5 | 6 | 18 | 41 | 3 | When pumping pressure stable for about 30s, pump rate may go to the next step. When WHP near WHP limit(psi) listed below, it is better decrease to a lower pump rate ,and go to bullheading by tubing. When obvious fractured ,stop pumping. When near WHP limit and the pump rate less than 5bpm, re- perforation is recommend. PASARGAD will pay for this extra charge.
6 | 8 | 24 | 65 | 3 | When pumping pressure stable for about 30s, pump rate may go to the next step. When WHP near WHP limit(psi) listed below, it is better decrease to a lower pump rate ,and go to bullheading by tubing. When obvious fractured ,stop pumping. When near WHP limit and the pump rate less than 5bpm, re- perforation is recommend. PASARGAD will pay for this extra charge.
7 | 10 | 30 | 95 | 3 | When pumping pressure stable for about 30s, pump rate may go to the next step. When WHP near WHP limit(psi) listed below, it is better decrease to a lower pump rate ,and go to bullheading by tubing. When obvious fractured ,stop pumping. When near WHP limit and the pump rate less than 5bpm, re- perforation is recommend. PASARGAD will pay for this extra charge.
8 | 12 | 36 | 131 | 3 | When pumping pressure stable for about 30s, pump rate may go to the next step. When WHP near WHP limit(psi) listed below, it is better decrease to a lower pump rate ,and go to bullheading by tubing. When obvious fractured ,stop pumping. When near WHP limit and the pump rate less than 5bpm, re- perforation is recommend. PASARGAD will pay for this extra charge.
9 | 14 | 42 | 173 | 3 | When pumping pressure stable for about 30s, pump rate may go to the next step. When WHP near WHP limit(psi) listed below, it is better decrease to a lower pump rate ,and go to bullheading by tubing. When obvious fractured ,stop pumping. When near WHP limit and the pump rate less than 5bpm, re- perforation is recommend. PASARGAD will pay for this extra charge.
10 | 8 | 24 | 197 | 3 | When pumping pressure stable for about 30s, pump rate may go to the next step. When WHP near WHP limit(psi) listed below, it is better decrease to a lower pump rate ,and go to bullheading by tubing. When obvious fractured ,stop pumping. When near WHP limit and the pump rate less than 5bpm, re- perforation is recommend. PASARGAD will pay for this extra charge.
11 | 2 | 4 | 203 | 2 | When pumping pressure stable for about 30s, pump rate may go to the next step. When WHP near WHP limit(psi) listed below, it is better decrease to a lower pump rate ,and go to bullheading by tubing. When obvious fractured ,stop pumping. When near WHP limit and the pump rate less than 5bpm, re- perforation is recommend. PASARGAD will pay for this extra charge.
12 | 0 | 0 | 203 | 2 | When pumping pressure stable for about 30s, pump rate may go to the next step. When WHP near WHP limit(psi) listed below, it is better decrease to a lower pump rate ,and go to bullheading by tubing. When obvious fractured ,stop pumping. When near WHP limit and the pump rate less than 5bpm, re- perforation is recommend. PASARGAD will pay for this extra charge.

[جدول 21]
No. | Equipment | Qty | Note
1 | 525HHP Acid Stimulation Unit | 3 | Each 1100hhp
2 | 2000HHP Fracturing pump unit | 2 | Each 2250hhp
3 | Stimulation Job Data Acquisition Van | 1 | 
4 | Stimulation Blender 30BBL | 1 | 
5 | Fluid Mixing Equipment | 1 | About 17bbl/min
6 | 10000 Gal Rubber Acid/Solvent Storage Tank | 6 | 4×11900gal+2×7935gal
7 | Water or diesel storage tank (400bbl cap.) | 3 | 
8 | Transferring Pump (Wilden / Delasco Pump) | 1 | 
9 | Air Compressor | 1 | 
10 | High pressure Manifold 15000PSI | 1 | 
11 | Suction Manifold | 1 | 
12 | Power Generator | 1 | 
13 | CTU (Coiled Tubing Unit) | 1set | 1.5＂OD CT
14 | Liquid Nitrogen Pump | 1 | 180kscfph
15 | Liquid Nitrogen Tank | 2 | 4000gal/Ea
16 | Crane | 1 | 35Ton
17 | Miscellaneous (low and high pressure pipe, hose, manifold, cross, valve, etc.) | 1 | Enough for operation,3” figure 1502
18 | Adjustable relief valve | 1 | 
19 | H2S detector | 6 | 
20 | Gas mask | 6 | 

[جدول 22]
Chemical / additives | Unit | 39270 gal gelled acid(including 10% tank bottom) | 26460 gal VDA(including 5% tank bottom)
Chemical / additives | Unit | Concentration (%) | Quantity | Concentration (%) | Quantity
HCl 28% | Gal | 15 | 11572. | 20 | 10638
Corrosion inhibitor | Gal | 1.5* | 343 | 1 | 154
Corrosion inhibitor Intensifier | Gal | 3 | 687 | 0 | 0
De-emulsifier agent | Gal | 1 | 229 | 0 | 0
Anti-sludge agent | Gal | 1 | 229 | 0 | 0
Surfactant agent | Gal | 1 | 229 | 0 | 0
H2S scavenger | Gal | 0.5 | 114 | 0 | 0
Iron control agent | Lb(1lb/Gal) | 1 | 229 | 1 | 154
Gelling agent | Lb | 0.2 | 381 | 0 | 0

[جدول 23]
Self-divert Surfactant (VES) | Gal | 0 | 0 | 8 | 1234
Fresh water | Gal |  | 6000 |  | 4000

[جدول 24]
Item | Material | Quantity | Comment
1 | Drilling water/fresh water | 1300bbls for flush / displace/mixing | Provided by CONTRACTOR
2 | Diesel | 16000gal for Acidizing Job | Provided by CONTRACTOR
3 | Liquid nitrogen | As Required | Provided by CONTRACTOR
4 | Resin | 70lb | Provided by CONTRACTOR

[جدول 25]
Item | Personnel | Quantity
1 | Stimulation Service Specialist | 1
2 | Stimulation Supervisor | 1
3 | Stimulation Engineer | 1
4 | Stimulation Operator | 3
5 | Stimulation Assistant Operator | 3
6 | Batch Mixer Operator | 1
7 | (Batch Mixer Operator)helper | 1

[جدول 26]
8 | CTU Operator Engineer | 1
9 | CTU Operator | 2
10 | CTU Helper | 2
11 | Liquid Nitrogen Pump Operator | 2
12 | (Liquid Nitrogen Pump) Operation Helper | 2

[جدول 27]
No. | Procedure description | Fluid name | Stage Volume (gals) | Remark
1 | RIH CT to2000m | LN2 | 200 | Normal Pumping rate

[جدول 28]
2 | Hold on CT with Pumping | LN2 | 3200 | 
3 | POOH CT to surface | LN2 | 100 | based as flow back to decide to carry out next step

[جدول 29]
No. | Procedure description | Pump rate (bpm) | Fluid Volume  (bbl.) | Est. Time  (min) | Remark
01 | RIH CT to 4500m and bullhead diesel |  | 50 |  | To be determined
02 | Pooh ct to surface |  |  |  | To be determined
1 | Bullhead diesel /asphaltene solvent for Injectivity test and /or isolation | 0.5-15 | 100 | 20 | Max. Pump rate
2 | Bullhead gelled acid note | 5-25 | 100 | 30 | 
3 | Bullhead VDA acid | 15-25 | 100 | 15 | Max. Pump rate
4 | Bullhead gelled acid | 15-30 | 100 | 15 | Max. Pump rate
5 | Bullhead  VDA acid | 20-30 | 200 | 15 | Max. Pump rate
6 | Continue Main Acid and VDA injection | …. |  |  | 
9 | Overflush with water/diesel | 20-35 | 300 | 20 | Max.  pump rate
10 | Stop pumping and close well |  |  | 30 | 
11 | Flow back & testing |  |  | 190 | 

[جدول 30]
Item |  | Specifications |  | Quantity | Supplier
1 | GR&CCL tool |  |  | For depth control | 1 | CONTRACTOR
2 | Fluid Density & Water Hold-up tool |  | For fluid identification | 1 | CONTRACTOR
3 | Flowmeter |  | For fluid velocity measurement | 1 | CONTRACTOR
4 | Pressure & Temperature tool |  |  | For PVT calculation | 1 | CONTRACTOR
5 | X-Y Caliper |  | For actual well ID measurements | 1 | CONTRACTOR

[جدول 31]
Item | Specification | Quantity | Supplier
1 | Truck-mounted logging unit | 1 ea | CONTRACTOR
2 | Well head pressure control equipment; stuffing box, lubricators, grease pump injection | 1 ea | CONTRACTOR
3 | H2S alert & Breathing Apparatus( if necessary) | As necessary | CONTRACTOR
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program | 
 | مناقصه "طرح سیاهمکان در قالب یک بسته یکپارچه از طرح عملیات محور افزایش و نگهداشت تولید 27 مخزن منتخب شرکت ملی مناطق نفتخیز جنوب" شماره مناقصه: (م م/0332/97) | 
 | Rigless Operation Program |