

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 21 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
Chapter 11         THE PROBLEM OF
DEVIATION AND DOGLEGGING IN ROTARY
                      BOREHOLES

INTRODUCTION

Deviation in drilling operations is not a new problem. The diamond core drill was invented in
1865 and widely used as a cable tool drill in mining operations. The first evidence of concern
about hole deviation was the invention by Nolten in Germany in 1874 of the use of hydrofluoric
acid to etch and predict hole deviation. The acid bottle, as it was called, with hydrofluoric acid
was lowered to the bottom and allowed to set until the acid etched the glass. The angle of
inclination was determined by the etched line.

Later a South African miner named MacGeorge invented the clinostat to predict both deviation
and direction. The clinostat consisting of a magnetic needle and a plumb immersed in gelatin
was lowered into the hole and the gelatin was allowed to set. The instrument was then brought
to the surface and deviation and direction were read directly. At a meeting of mining engineers
in London in 1885 MacGeorge presented data illustrating deviations of 75 feet in 100 foot mine
shafts.

The Petroleum Industry did not become aware of the problem until the Seminole, Oklahoma,
boom of the middle 1920s.  Town  lot spacing was the primary factor contributing to the
experience of the industry. There are actual recorded incidents of offset wells drilling into each
other, wells drilling into producing wells, two rigs drilling the same hole, and the wells in the
geometric center of the structure coming in low or missing the field completely.

It was common drilling practice at that time to use only large drill pipe with no drill collars and all
available weight since weight indicators were not available.  Engineers and the industry in
general made a concentrated effort to solve the crooked hole problem. As a result, most of the
practices commonly used today in an effort to correct and control deviation were conceived,
experimented with and adopted in the 1920's, 50 years ago.

The most effective practices adopted and still used today were the use of drill collars for weight
and rigidity, the use of stabilizers at various points in the string to control deviation and provide
rigidity, and the practice of fanning bottom (drilling with very low bit weights) to reduce angle.
The first two have made the industry millions of dollars; the practice of fanning bottom has cost
the industry millions of dollars.

For whatever reason, early researchers were successful in their efforts. Wells surveyed in the
greater Seminole, Oklahoma area with and without straight hole practices produced the results
in Table 11-1.

The data in Table 11-1 would indicate that the engineers of the 1920's didn't solve the problem
of deviation, but the practices introduced are fundamental to the practices today.





Copyright © 2007 OGCI/PetroSkills. All rights reserved.                                                   11-1


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 2 از 21 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
H o r i z o n t a l a n d D i r e c t i o n a l D r i l l i n g
C h a p t e r 1 1

                              Table 11-1. Survey Results from Seminole Field


                                   Without                   With
                               Straight-Hole Practices    Straight-Hole Practices

        Number of Wells              216                     58

        Total Feet Surveyed           910,232                  233,341

         Average Depth               4,214                     4,023

         Average Angle               13° 19'                     5° 19'

       Maximum Angle              46° 0'                     19° 0'


Very little research was performed in the area of deviation until Arthur Lubinski performed his
work in the early 1950's, and real interest resulted from the advent and popularity of directional
drilling.   In the last few years considerable field experience has been reported which has
contributed significantly to the  total knowledge of  this particular aspect of  oil well  drilling
technology.

The economic incentive to develop techniques to cope with deviation  is staggering.  One
contractor estimated that the additional surveys alone cost $0.50/foot of hole drilled.  The
AAODC once estimated that a more realistic approach to deviation could save the industry $40
million per year, and these estimates did not extend to directional drilling. Field experience has
proven that drilling time can be reduced by as much as 30 to 50 percent of current practices
with a realistic approach to deviation.

The sad thing about this deviation problem is that the available technology is not being applied.
In many areas of the world, drilling contracts are written in the same manner as they were 15
years or 50 years ago. That is, hole deviation is limited to 1°/1,000 feet. This is truly an area
where most operators and drilling people merely do what has been done for the last 15 years
thereby impeding progress by not doing anything. The potential for advanced thinking in this
area is unlimited.  This problem has cost the drilling industry too much money for too many
years.

With drilling costs what they are today, a lackadaisical attitude toward any phase of Drilling
Technology, and particularly one so costly, should not be tolerated.  In his early work Arthur
Lubinski suggested it, recently in his series in World Oil Moak Rollins said it, and in this book I'm
going to shout it around the world. Our industry can no longer afford to pay the prices that have
been paid in the past for deviated holes. We can no longer afford to take twice as long to finish
our work simply because we're afraid the hole might get crooked.

In this discussion we will analyze all available technology in deviation and doglegging.  Field
experience will be evaluated in the light of available technology, and we will ultimately determine
the most sophisticated approach to the problem in view of the total technology and available
field experience.





11-2                                                      Copyright © 2007 OGCI/PetroSkills. All rights reserved


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 3 از 21 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                                          H o r i z o n t a l a n d D i r e c t i o n a l D r i l l i n g
                    T h e P r o b l e m o f D e v i a t i o n a n d D o g l e g g i n g  i n R o t a r y B o r e h o l e s

THEORIES OF CAUSES OF DEVIATED HOLES

The anisotropic formation theory is widely accepted.  Past theoretical studies have assumed
that the  bit  drills in the direction of the resultant force on the  bit in uniform or isotropic
formations.  This implies that the bit does not display a preferential direction of drilling, Figure
11-1 (A).    Stratified or anisotropic formations are assumed to possess different  drillability
parallel and normal to the bedding plane with the result that the bit does not drill in the direction
of resultant force.

Each formation  is characterized
by  its anisotropic index and dip
angle.   The  anisotropic  index
does not depend upon  specific
rock properties but is an empirical
constant determined from drilling
measurements.  This theory has
been applied to the computation
of the equilibrium hole inclination
angle for straight inclined holes.

The  formation  drillability  theory
seeks  to  explain  hole  angle
change in terms of the difference
in drilling rates in hard and soft
dipping  formations, Figure 11-1
(B). Presumably angle in the hole
changes because  the  bit  drills
slower in that portion of the hole
in the hard formation. Inherent in
this  theory   is  the  underlying
assumption that the bit weight is
distributed  uniformly  over  the
bottom of the hole.    It predicts
updip deviation when drilling into
softer  rock  and  downdip  into
harder rock.

The miniature whipstock theory is
based  on   drilling  experiments
made by Hughes Tool Company,
Figure  11-1  (C),  in  which an
artificial  formation composed  of                                                       Figure 11-1. Theories of Deviated Holes
glass plates has been drilled with
the   hole    inclined    to   the
laminations.  In these tests the plates fractured perpendicular to the bedding plane, creating
miniature  whipstocks.     If such  whipstocks  are  created when  laminated  rock  fractures
perpendicular to bedding planes, this could cause updip drilling.  This theory offers a possible
qualitative explanation to hole deviation in slightly dipping formations; however,  it does not
explain the downdip which occurs in steeply dipping formations.





Copyright © 2007 OGCI/PetroSkills. All rights reserved.                                                   11-3


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 4 از 21 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
H o r i z o n t a l a n d D i r e c t i o n a l D r i l l i n g
C h a p t e r 1 1

The drill collar moment theory, Figure 11-1 (D), suggests that when a bit drills from a soft to a
hard formation, the weight on bit is not distributed evenly along the bottom of the hole. Since
more of the weight on bit is taken by the hard formation, a moment is generated at the bit. Such
a moment changes the pendulum length to the point of tangency as well as the side force at the
bit. The variation of side force is not the same when drilling from soft to hard formations as
when drilling from hard to soft and, therefore, can effect a change of hole inclination.

Raymond Knapp, Figure 11-1 (E), suggests that deviation results in dipping formations which
vary in hardness and is directly related to the inability of the bit to drill a full gauge hole.  All bits
ream a small portion of the hole to gauge with the heal rows. Mr. Knapp contends that in going
from a soft to a hard formation the bit would be unable to ream the hard formation to gauge as
fast as  it could drill the soft formation; therefore, the bit would be deflected toward the softer
formation. Random deviation would result.

Experience has shown  that  deviation occurs more  often  in laminated beds than  thick,
homogeneous deposits.  Deviation is almost always associated with areas of steeply dipping
formations. Faulting or perhaps the stresses associated with faulting influence deviation.

In the final analysis there is no one satisfactory explanation for deviation.   It appears to be
related to geology.  Deviation is never greater than bed dip.  All theory and practice indicates
that the maximum deviation  is perpendicular to or parallel to the formation dip.   In  fact,
Lubinski's model which is the most widely accepted suggests that total deviation will always be
less than formation dip. This is an interesting and significant point. Why be afraid of deviation if
bed dips are not severe?

CATEGORIZING CROOKED HOLES

If we are to fight a problem, we must decide when the problem is a problem and when the
problem is only a potential problem. When we talk of hole deviation, we cover a multitude of
evils; therefore, it becomes necessary to dissect the agglomeration into its component parts and
evaluate the problems associated with each and the techniques normally associated with
coping with those problems.  First then, let's consider holes that deviate from vertical uniformly
in one plane and the "doglegs" or changes in direction will be considered.

A rotary borehole that is not vertical is deviated.  Probably 95 percent of the instruments
commonly used in the industry today measure only deviation from vertical with no regard for
direction or changes in direction. The assumption is made, then, that the borehole is planer as
illustrated in Figure 11-2(A).

With this type of deviation many reasons are given which brand this type of hole as undesirable
and necessitate the expenditure of multitudes of money to eliminate the problem. The more
common anticipated problems are:

        1.  Inadequate and misleading subsurface information.

        2.  Insignificance of surface location with respect to well spacing.

        3.  Inadequate drainage of production sands.





11-4                                                      Copyright © 2007 OGCI/PetroSkills. All rights reserved


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 5 از 21 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                                          H o r i z o n t a l a n d D i r e c t i o n a l D r i l l i n g


        4.  Crossing lease lines.

        5.  Excessive production problems.

        6.  Excessive drilling problems.

With respect to the anticipated excessive  drilling
problems, directional drilling experience has proven
that drilling problems are virtually non-existent in a
borehole  inclined  in  excess  of  50°.   As  for
production problems, many years experience  at
Long Beach, Huntington Beach, and other coastal
fields has produced no severe production problems
in holes deviated in excess of 45°. The reason that
very few problems result from deviation alone  is
best illustrated by Figure 11-3.

As  illustrated,  relatively  insignificant forces result
from  deviation  angle  only.    For  comparative
purposes a tool joint force less than 2,000 pounds is
not considered detrimental  in normal operations.
Therefore,  it must be concluded from the available
experience and technology  that  deviation alone
causes no severe drilling or production problems.

Lease  line,  spacing,  subsurface  information,  or
drainage cannot be considered a major problem
since offset data has for years been used to predict
natural  drift.  As shown  in Figure 11-2 (D)  the
surface location is simply moved to compensate for
the anticipated  drift and the hole  is  drilled  in a                                                            Figure 11-2. Reaching Target Area-Deviated Holes
normal fashion.





            Figure 11-3. Comparison of Casing and Tubing Wear Forces. (R.S. Hoch, World Oil, 1962)




Copyright © 2007 OGCI/PetroSkills. All rights reserved.                                                   11-5


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 6 از 21 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
H o r i z o n t a l a n d D i r e c t i o n a l D r i l l i n g
C h a p t e r 1 1

The only conceivable conclusion, then, from this discussion is that there is no good reason why
deviation alone should be considered a major obstacle.  Only in isolated instances should  it
become necessary  to  correct  or  control  drift.   However, a discussion  of  deviation and
doglegging would not be complete without a discussion of the techniques presently being used
to correct and/or control drift.

METHODS USED TO CONTROL DEVIATION

Unquestionably, the most universally accepted practice for correcting drift is referred to as the
Pendulum Assembly. The concept evolved from the early work with stabilizers in the 1920's.
Fundamentally  illustrated  in Figure 11-4, the Pendulum Assembly  utilized a  stabilizer  to
increase the restoring force by increasing the  drill collar length contributing to the restoring
force.

Arthur Lubinski applied technology to the
concept and explored the problem in his
paper titled "Factors Affecting the Angle
of Inclination and Doglegging in Rotary
Bore Holes" published  in 1953.  The
purpose   of   the   paper  was   to
mathematically describe the effects of bit
weight, formation characteristics, collar
to   hole   clearance,  and   stabilizer
placement   on    deviation.       For
mathematical simplicity  it was assumed
that:

        1. The drill string always lies to
           the low side of the hole.

        2. Dynamic  forces caused by
            rotation are insignificant.

        3. The drill string never helically
                                                Figure 11-4. Fundamental Pendulum Assembly Increases the
           buckles.                                                  Restoring Force by Increasing the Tangent Length with a
                                                                        Stabilizer in the Proper Position
        4.  In an anisotropic formation as
           previously described, the bit travels in the direction of the resultant force including a
           formation force.

        5.  Equilibrium is necessary for approximately 100 feet  if the data is to be properly
           applied.

These assumptions are basically sound and contribute simplicity to the mathematical model.
However, the drill string does not always lie to the low side of the hole, the rotational forces may
be significant and the drill string does helically buckle on occasion.

The conclusions reached by Lubinski were very significant to the industry and constituted a
major contribution to drilling technology.  Unfortunately, our industry does not now, 20 years





11-6                                                      Copyright © 2007 OGCI/PetroSkills. All rights reserved


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 7 از 21 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                                          H o r i z o n t a l a n d D i r e c t i o n a l D r i l l i n g
                    T h e P r o b l e m o f D e v i a t i o n a n d D o g l e g g i n g  i n R o t a r y B o r e h o l e s

later, utilize the technology developed. The most important, overlooked conclusion concerns
doglegs or changes in deviation which are to be discussed thoroughly later.

It was concluded that doglegs normally result from a change in conditions such as a change in
bit weight or a change in formation property.  Doglegs resulting from sudden changes in bit
weight and sudden changes in formation dip were studied, and  it was concluded that drilling
with more bit weight and allowing the inclination to build did not result in sharper doglegs!

The Pendulum Assembly resulted from the conclusion that the only force available to restore a
deviated hole to vertical is the weight of the drill collars between the point of tangency and the
bit (refer to Figure 11-4 ). Further, the restoring force may be increased by increasing the length
between the bit and the point of tangency by the proper use of stabilizers. The mathematical
model described was used to determine the most effective stabilizer position under defined
conditions.

The stabilizer position data were presented in many forms with the most effective being a set of
tables  available from  Drilco, Readers  Service Department, Box 3135,  Midland, Texas.
Complete instructions accompany these tables; however, a brief discussion of these tables is in
order in this text.  Let's assume that it has been determined that the formation dip is 20°, a 7⅞
inch hole is being drilled with 5½ inch drill collars, bit weight is 13,000 pounds, and deviation
from vertical is 4°.

The tabular data developed by Lubinski et al. relating to their conditions appears as illustrated in
Figure 11-5 (A).  In the tables the hole class indicates the severity of the condition, i.e. "A" is
most severe and "U" is least severe. Using the assumed conditions, it is then determined from
Figure 11-5 (A) that a class "Q" condition exists. This means that under the drilling conditions
established, equilibrium has been established, the restoring force is equal to the deviating force,
and the effects of increasing the restoring force or changing any of the drilling variables can be
evaluated.

For the purpose of familiarizing ourselves with the material,  let's look at some examples.
Looking across the "Q" condition line, if a stabilizer is placed 60 to 67 feet above the bit, the bit
weight can be increased to 18,110 pounds or 36.8 percent. Suppose we were brave and would
run 7 inch drill collars with a stabilizer 60 feet above the bit.

Looking under 7 inch collars and the "Q" condition  it is determined that bit weight could be
increased to 30,600 pounds or 131 percent which would improve penetration rate 131 percent!
Let's assume that we are near the bottom of the hole and we could live with a 10° deviation.
Looking at Figure 11-5 (B) for the "Q" condition and the 5½ inch collars with a stabilizer 40 to 45
feet from bottom, the bit weight could be increased to 44,800 pounds or 238 percent which
represents an increase of 238 percent in penetration rate!  Obviously, intelligently applied, this
information can result in improved performance through faster penetration rates with a minimum
risk.

What is the risk?  Let's look at what would happen if the formation dip was 45° instead of the
20° assumed.  Further, let's assume that we had to put the stabilizer at 40 feet on the 5½ inch
collars, run the 44,800 pounds and  let the hole  drift to 10°.  From Figure 11-5 (C),  it  is
determined that the formation was probably a class "S". Under the conditions assumed, Figure
11-5 (C) indicates that the equilibrium hole angle would be slightly over 10°. Depending upon
the circumstances, a 125 percent error in formation dip may or may not constitute a risk at all. A
radical change in formation classification would be critical.




Copyright © 2007 OGCI/PetroSkills. All rights reserved.                                                   11-7


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 8 از 21 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
H o r i z o n t a l a n d D i r e c t i o n a l D r i l l i n g
C h a p t e r 1 1

Let's assume that the bit weight has been increased to 44,800 pounds with the stabilizer at 40
to 45 feet on the 5½ inch drill collars, and the formation suddenly changes from a type "Q" to a
type "N", the deviation would drift to 15° from vertical before equilibrium was achieved.

Studying these charts reveals that the obviously best solution to the problem of drift is to pack
the hole with the largest acceptable collars and stabilizers from the very start. This realization
led to the development of the square drill collar which is, unquestionably, the best tool available
for controlling direction or drift.





  Figure 11-5. Excerpt from Drilco Tables for Effects of Collar Size, Bit Weight, and Collar Stabilizers on Deviation

Tools other than conventional directional tools available and used in the field to correct or
control drift are the woodpecker drill collar, the hammer tool, two cone bit, and the DM bit.





11-8                                                      Copyright © 2007 OGCI/PetroSkills. All rights reserved


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 9 از 21 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                                          H o r i z o n t a l a n d D i r e c t i o n a l D r i l l i n g
                    T h e P r o b l e m o f D e v i a t i o n a n d D o g l e g g i n g  i n R o t a r y B o r e h o l e s

The woodpecker drill collar is an ordinary 30 foot drill collar with 1 inch holes drilled into it at 1
foot intervals.  This causes the collar to rotate about a center other than its geometric center.
Therefore,   in  an  inclined  hole,  the
restoring force would be increased by the
centrifugal  force  of  the  collar mass
rotating  about   its  center   of  mass.
However, the deviating force would be
increased by the centrifugal force minus
the collar weight.  Figure 11-6 illustrates
the principles involved.   At equilibrium
the Restoring Force, FR, is by definition
equal to the Deviating Force, FD.   If the
Woodpecker  Drill  Collar  is  introduced,
both  the  Restoring  Forces  and  the
Deviating Forces are increased by some
Mass multiplied by its acceleration (Ma).
The net effect  is that the Woodpecker
Drill  Collar  has  no   effect  on  the
equilibrium conditions.

                                                          Figure 11-6. The Woodpecker Drill CollarWith the woodpecker drill collar:

              Restoring Force =Drill Collar Weight + Ma

              Deviating Force = Deviating Force + Ma

At equilibrium without the woodpecker drill collar:

           FR = FD

Introducing the woodpecker drill collar:

           FR = FR + Ma

           FD = FD + Ma

Or the equilibrium is altered as follows:

           FR + Ma = FD + Ma

           FR = FD

Or the equilibrium condition is unaltered by the woodpecker drill collar

The Two Cone Bit is widely used in attempting to reduce hole angle. The thought is that the bit
weight per chisel is increased (if each tooth can be called a chisel), permitting faster penetration
rates at lower bit weights. In other words, penetration rate can be maintained while lowering bit
weight, thereby reducing hole angle at no sacrifice of drilling time.  Field data has never
substantiated this position.  In addition, sufficient data has never been printed to permit the




Copyright © 2007 OGCI/PetroSkills. All rights reserved.                                                   11-9


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 10 از 21 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
H o r i z o n t a l a n d D i r e c t i o n a l D r i l l i n g
C h a p t e r 1 1

systematic application of the principle.  It is my conclusion that the tool as it is now being used is
worthless.

When  air  drilling was popular, the Hammer Tool was promoted as an aid  in preventing
deviation.  The Hammer Tool adds the principle of cable tool drilling to rotary drilling.  The
thought was that penetration rates could be maintained at lower bit weights. The researchers of
the 1920's found that cable tool holes were as crooked as rotary holes.  Further, the position
concerning the Hammer Tool has never been substantiated by field data.  In fact, field data
examined by this author found no improvement in crooked hole conditions could be attributed to
the use of the Hammer Tool. In my opinion, the Hammer Tool or percussion drill is worthless as
a tool to correct deviation and that when sufficient collars are available for optimum bit weights,
it is worthless as a tool to increase penetration rate.

The DM Bit was designed by Mr. Raymond Knapp of Ardmore, Oklahoma. Mr. Knapp has many
years experience in the oil field and is as fine a person as  I have ever had the pleasure of
meeting.   His  crooked  hole  theory was
previously discussed as being due  to the
inability of an ordinary bit to drill the hole to
gauge.  Therefore, Mr. Knapp designed a bit
on a 39° pin angle to  drill a gauge hole.
Further, he put a web completely around the
heel of each cone to resist the lateral forces
which he contended caused deviation ( Figure
11-7 ).

Again no consistent field results have been
presented establishing the usefulness of the
DM  bit  in  controlling  deviation.   To  the
contrary informal investigation by this author
found no correlation between  bit type and
deviation.     It  is my conclusion based on
extensive experience that the DM Bit is not
useful as a tool in combating or controlling
deviation.

In summary, we have examined a problem
that isn't really a problem. The solution to the
problem  is  to  plan  the  well so  that  the
problem can be ignored.    If  drift must be
controlled,  the  only  sound  approach   is
through the use of a packed hole assembly
or  a  pendulum  assembly.      All  other
techniques are a waste of time and money.
Now   let's  talk  about  the  real  problem,                Figure 11-7. The Webb Bit
doglegging.

DOGLEGGING IN ROTARY BOREHOLES

Doglegs or sudden changes in hole angle or hole direction were recognized as  a  major
potential problem by the pioneers of the drilling business. When it was possible to determine



11-10                                                     Copyright © 2007 OGCI/PetroSkills. All rights reserved


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 11 از 21 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                                          H o r i z o n t a l a n d D i r e c t i o n a l D r i l l i n g
                    T h e P r o b l e m o f D e v i a t i o n a n d D o g l e g g i n g  i n R o t a r y B o r e h o l e s

that a rapid change in angle had occurred, their solution was automatically plugged back and
started over. Perhaps it is well that detection procedures were not highly defined or else a hole
may never have reached total depth.

Modern surveying techniques indicate that no hole  is perfectly  vertical.  Any hole has a
tendency to spiral.  In fact, some holes surveyed made three complete circles in 100 feet.
Spiraling is reduced as the deviation from vertical increases. The maximum spiraling occurs at
angles less than 3° from vertical. At angles greater than 5° from vertical, the hole may move in
a wide arc, but spiraling is almost non-existent.

Doglegs are a major factor  in many of our more
severe  drilling  problems.   Doglegging  should be
suspected  when   the   following  problems   are
encountered:  (1) unable to log,  (2) unable to run
pipe,  (3) key seating,  (4) excessive casing wear, (5)
excessive  wear  on   drill  pipe  and  collars,    (6)
excessive drag,  (7) fatigue failures of drill pipe and
collars,  and/or  (8)  excessive wear on  production
equipment.

Re-examination of Figure 11-3 partially explains the
potential hazards. With respect to the tool joint force
against the casing, note that a hole with 8° deviation
from vertical, the tool joint contact force is essentially
negligible.   However,  under  100,000  pounds  of
tension a dogleg of 8° in 100 feet produces a wear
force exceeding 4,000 pounds.   It is obvious that the
doglegging  is the most severe problem, and   it  is
primarily a drilling problem.

The major problem facing the industry was to define a
severe dogleg within the industry's ability to survey
doglegs.   Arthur Lubinski made the  first efforts to
define  a  severe  dogleg   in  his  paper  entitled
"Maximum Permissible Doglegs in Rotary Boreholes"
published in 1961.  Lubinski recognized that severe
doglegs created major drilling problems and proposed
that a dogleg was too severe   if any one  of the
following conditions existed (Figure 11-8):

        1. The stress reversals when rotating in the
          dogleg were sufficient to fatigue the  drill
           pipe.

        2. The contact force on the drill pipe tool joint
             in the dogleg was sufficient to cause the           Figure 11-8. Dogleg Severity
            tool  joint  to dig  into the formation and
         cause a key seat or produce casing wear.

        3. The stress reversals when rotating in the dogleg were sufficient to fatigue the drill
            collars.




Copyright © 2007 OGCI/PetroSkills. All rights reserved.                                                 11-11


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 12 از 21 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
H o r i z o n t a l a n d D i r e c t i o n a l D r i l l i n g
C h a p t e r 1 1

Lubinski concluded that these conditions should be avoided and each section of the hole should
be evaluated in view of the limiting conditions in order to determine the maximum permissible
dogleg at any given depth.

First, let's consider drill pipe fatigue.  Figure 11-9 illustrates the maximum permissible doglegs
to  avoid  drill  pipe  fatigue as a
function of tension on the drill pipe
or depth for 4½ inch Grade E drill
pipe.   From  Figure  11-9,  for
example, with 300,000 pounds of
tension on the drill string which is
comparable    to    approximately
20,000 feet of pipe, a dogleg  in
excess  of 1½º  in 100  feet  at/or
near the surface exists.

At a  point 3,000  feet from  the
bottom of the 20,000 foot hole, the
tension  would  be  only  45,000
pounds, and a 7½° change in 100
feet of hole would be required to
produce  drill pipe fatigue.  Thus
potential      drill    pipe    fatigue
constitutes a  limiting condition  in
determining     a    maximum
permissible   dogleg,   and   the
tension or load on the drill pipe is
the major factor affecting fatigue.
Obviously, a much larger change
in angle can be tolerated at total
depth, whereas  only  very  small
changes can be tolerated at the
surface in very deep holes.

Another consideration is the force
caused by  the  drill  string  at a
dogleg in the hole or casing.   In
                                            Figure 11-9. Gradual and Long Dogleg Curvature vs Tension for
order to determine the maximum                                             4½ inch Grade E Pipe
permissible  contact  force  (which
Lubinski called thrust force), Lubinski assumed that a dogleg of 1½° in 100 feet never caused
any trouble. The deepest holes of that time were 16,000 to 18,000 feet in depth.  At 17,000
feet, the drill pipe load in a 1½° per 100 foot dogleg results in a 2000 pound contact force on the
formation or casing in the dogleg. Based on this experience then, it was assumed that a 2000
pound or less contact force would never create a drilling problem. The dashed curve in Figure
11-9 represents the maximum permissible dogleg to prevent excessive contact forces as a
function of tension on the drill string.  Obviously, casing wear and key seats associated with
excessive contact forces are more critical near the surface in deep wells. Larger doglegs can
be tolerated nearer total depth without danger to hole and casing.

The final limiting condition, according to Lubinski, is drill collar fatigue. Lubinski studied various
conditions for different collar sizes, and calculations were made of the abrupt dogleg angle for



11-12                                                     Copyright © 2007 OGCI/PetroSkills. All rights reserved


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 13 از 21 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                                          H o r i z o n t a l a n d D i r e c t i o n a l D r i l l i n g
                    T h e P r o b l e m o f D e v i a t i o n a n d D o g l e g g i n g  i n R o t a r y B o r e h o l e s

which the connections would be subjected to a bending moment sufficient to produce fatigue
failure.   It was concluded that the critical angle is a function of collar to hole clearance, the
amount of tension or compression to which the collars are subjected in the dogleg, hole
inclination, and whether the inclination is increasing or decreasing.

When using packed hole assemblies, the critical angle is independent of all factors except
clearance.  For example, in Figure 11-10 (A), 6¼ inch collars in a 7 inch hole can tolerate a
dogleg of 1.2° in 30 feet or 3.6° in 100 feet with fatigue failure. On the other extreme the
behavior of 6¼ inch collars in a 12¼ inch hole is erratic as illustrated in Figure 11-10 (F). The
more common combination of 6¼ inch collars in a 7⅞ inch hole (Figure 11-10 (B) will tolerate a
more severe dogleg without failure than  will the packed hole assembly combination under
normal operating conditions and is essentially a function of clearance. Conversely, it is obvious
from Lubinski's work that reduced collar to wall clearance resists doglegging.

Lubinski concluded that each section of the hole, every 1,000 feet, for example, should be
evaluated with respect to these limiting conditions of pipe and collar fatigue, key seating, and
casing wear.  The condition  permitting the smallest dogleg would  dictate the operating
limitations imposed on that section of the hole. The normal result is that potential key seating
and casing wear  will dictate the maximum permissible dogleg angle tolerable to moderate
depths, and will be less than 1½°/100 feet only in ultra-deep holes.

Potential drill pipe fatigue will normally dictate the maximum permissible dogleg in the middle of
the string and to the top of the collars.  Potential drill collar failure will dictate the maximum
permissible dogleg angle both at the bottom of the hole and from surface to total depth as well.
Obviously, the collars must drill and pass through the entire hole.  For example, for 6¼ inch
collars in a 7⅞ inch hole, the maximum permissible change in angle is approximately 3½° in
100 feet; therefore, nowhere in the hole should a greater change be tolerated.

In an effort to apply experience to Lubinski's work, the API Mid-Continent Study Committee on
Straight-Hole Drilling published in 1963 a study of 1,094 doglegs in the Gulf Coast, Mid-
Continent, and West Cost areas.  Elaborate efforts were made to associate problems with the
dogleg and its severity. Doglegs up to 25°/100 feet were reported.

The committee's study substantiated the minimum limitation of 1½°/100 feet.  This minimum
limit should be re-evaluated when drilling ultra-deep holes. Further, the study substantiated the
limitations with regard to  drill collar fatigue.  Essentially, the committee suggested that the
bottom of the hole equal to the length of the collar string should be limited by collar fatigue (i.e.
3½°/100 feet for 6¼ inch collars) at the bottom and limited to 1½°/100 feet over the remainder of
the hole.

The experience evaluated indicated  that no problems would be encountered under  this
schedule regardless of the ultimate total deviation from vertical. However,  it should be noted
that no dogleg was reported below 11,000 feet and that such a program should be re-evaluated
when drilling deep tests.





Copyright © 2007 OGCI/PetroSkills. All rights reserved.                                                 11-13


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 14 از 21 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
H o r i z o n t a l a n d D i r e c t i o n a l D r i l l i n g
C h a p t e r 1 1





Figure 11-10. Maximum Difference of Angle over a 30 foot Interval to Avoid Drill Collar Connection Failures -   6¼
              inch Drill Collars. Positive φ= Tension and Negative φ= Compression (From Lubinski)

Two other significant conclusions were reached in these papers.  First, Lubinski concluded that
dogleg severity was independent of the weight on the bit. That is, drilling with more weight on
the bit would not result in sharper doglegs; conversely, drilling with very low bit weights or
"fanning bottom" would not reduce dogleg severity.  In fact, "fanning bottom" is detrimental to




11-14                                                     Copyright © 2007 OGCI/PetroSkills. All rights reserved


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 15 از 21 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                                          H o r i z o n t a l a n d D i r e c t i o n a l D r i l l i n g
                    T h e P r o b l e m o f D e v i a t i o n a n d D o g l e g g i n g  i n R o t a r y B o r e h o l e s

the  drill string since low  bit weights result in increased string tension which increases the
potential of casing wear, pipe fatigue, collar fatigue, and key seating as previously explained.

Secondly, the API Study Committee divided the doglegs into "soft" and "hard" formations. The
previous discussions applied to "soft" formations. Of the 140 "hard" formation doglegs reported,
only one resulted in a serious problem; therefore,  it was concluded that fewer problems could
be expected in hard formations as a result of changes in angle.

Since dogleg severity is primarily a function of clearance, the only practical method available to
reduce dogleg severity is to reduce the collar to wall clearance or pack the hole and to increase
stiffness by increasing hole size (last resort).  Packed hole assemblies include all forms of
reamers, integral blade stabilizers, spiral collars, and rotating stabilizers at almost any spacing
combination.  However, the best tool available today is the square drill collar with corner to
corner measuring 1/16th inch less than hole size.

Numerous papers have reported successful experiences  all over the world including South
America, Gulf Coast, Mid-Continent, Rocky Mountains, and Canada, and under all conceivable
drilling conditions.  In all the literature reviewed, no dogleg severity greater than 3½°/100 feet
was reported while using a square drill collar regardless of drilling conditions.

Other practices designed to merely cope with severe doglegs are as follows:

        1.  Increase frequency of drill collar inspection.

        2. Use non-hard banded drill pipe through the dogleg to avoid excessive casing wear.

        3. Reduce rotary speed while drilling through the dogleg to reduce the number of stress
           reversals.

        4.  Minimize off-bottom rotation to reduce unnecessary stress reversals with maximum
            tensile stress.

        5. Use packed hole assemblies to reduce dogleg severity.

        6. Keep the kick-off point in a directional well as deep as practical.

        7. Use heavier casing through working doglegs.

        8.  String reamers will often reduce dogleg severity and prevent key seats.

In summary, dogleg severity is a serious drilling problem. Dogleg severity is a function of collar
clearance. The best tool available to control dogleg severity is the square drill collar. In reports
from around the globe covering over one million feet of hole, the square drill collar has been
credited with improving hole conditions, reducing fishing jobs, improving penetration rates,
improving bit runs, decreasing survey frequency, and decreasing dogleg severity.  Fanning
bottom is of no benefit in controlling dogleg severity. In fact, it is detrimental to the drill string.





Copyright © 2007 OGCI/PetroSkills. All rights reserved.                                                 11-15


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 16 از 21 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
H o r i z o n t a l a n d D i r e c t i o n a l D r i l l i n g
C h a p t e r 1 1

A UNIQUE APPROACH TO DEVIATION

The purpose of this section is to describe this author's experience in deviation and doglegging.
The fundamental premise was that the reduced penetration rates and high costs associated
with severe deviation and doglegging would not be accepted; an acceptable solution would be
found.

Research was  difficult.  Data was confusing.   Correlating and evaluating  field data was
extremely difficult. A particular bottomhole assembly would appear successful on one job and a
dismal failure on the next.  Controlled drilling practices might appear successful and fail on an
offset. The problem seemed to be that the variables were not being adequately isolated and
evaluated.

The approach adopted, then, was to include all conceivable variables over a broad application
and find some variable or combination of variables common to all successful ventures. The
area evaluated was the Arkoma Basin of Southeastern Oklahoma.  The  drilling practices
common to the area comprised the variables and were as follows:

        1.  Subsurface Geology - Detailed regional geology was prepared. In addition, specifics
           studied at each location included faulting, bed dips, formation tops, and any other
          anomalies.

        2.  Bottomhole Assembly - Surely every conceivable bottomhole assembly was in use in
           the Arkoma Basin. Common techniques included stiff stabilizer assemblies, square
                drill collars, woodpecker drill collars, the hammer drill, and the pendulum assembly.

        3.  Bit Type - All types of conventional bits were common including insert bits. Common
            "straight hole" bits included the DM Bit, the Two Cone Bit, and various other webbed
             bits (T and U teeth).

        4.  Drilling Fluid - The Arkoma Basin offered a unique opportunity to study the variation
             in drilling fluids from dry air or gas to various forms of mist drilling to aerated mud
              drilling to mud drilling.  All phases were common to the area.

        5.  Hole Size and Collar Size - Not much variation was noted in the area. Hole size was
          almost always 7⅞ inches in diameter, and contractors generally furnished 6 inch
            collars.

        6.  Surveys and Survey Frequency - Only single shot data providing deviation without
          regard for direction was available. Surveys were frequently run at 15 foot intervals;
           the interval between surveys never exceeded 90 to 120 feet.

        7.  Rotary rpm - The rotary speeds studied varied 60 to 120 rpm with speeds closer to
         60 rpm being more common. No significant variation was noted.

        8.  Penetration Rate - Penetration rates varied from as little as 10 feet/day to 1,500 feet
          per day. A wide variation was available.

        9.  Bit Weight - A wide variation was available for study.  In some air holes  it was
          questionable whether or not the bit was on bottom; in some mud holes bit weight
        was as high as 60,000 pounds on a 7⅞ inch bit.



11-16                                                     Copyright © 2007 OGCI/PetroSkills. All rights reserved


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 17 از 21 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                                          H o r i z o n t a l a n d D i r e c t i o n a l D r i l l i n g
                    T h e P r o b l e m o f D e v i a t i o n a n d D o g l e g g i n g  i n R o t a r y B o r e h o l e s

As discussed, the approach was to compile this data on as many wells as possible and evaluate
the success at each location in controlling deviation and doglegging.

This study resulted in a very startling conclusion--within the realm of the research and on the
limited number of wells analyzed, as long as the subsurface geology was consistent, no
variable, no group of variables reviewed, had a consistent and correlatable effect on the
ultimate deviation.   (Since only single shot data was available, dogleg severity was not
rigorously evaluated.) Now, that's a conclusion which challenges some time-honored concepts
relating to deviation and doglegging and is not readily acceptable.  So,  let's examine the
variables for consistency within the conclusion.

It was conceded that the variation in rotary rpm and clearance was not sufficient to provide
significant data. The data indicated no benefit in ultimate deviation resulted from bit type or
bottomhole assembly.  (Again,  it must be emphasized that dogleg severity was not rigorously
evaluated due to insufficient data. The literature is filled with competent field data stressing the
relationship between clearance and dogleg severity and is not denied or ignored.) There was
no correlation between the type of drilling fluid and the ultimate deviation.

The conclusion that really sticks in the throat is that no correlation was found between bit weight
and ultimate deviation. "Anyone who has been in the oil field overnight knows that a reduction
in bit weight will reduce hole angle," asserted a very capable toolpusher and this statement
adequately describes the position of the industry.   But, the conclusion  in  this area was
inescapable.

A comparable offset to an air hole was drilled with mud.  Bit weights on the air hole were from
essentially zero to a high of 8,000 to 10,000 pounds; the bit weights on the mud hole would
range from 20,000 to 60,000 pounds; and no significant variation in ultimate deviation was
recorded. Even more dramatic was the comparison before and after an air hole was mudded
up.  Bit weight while air drilling would typically be 8,000 to 10,000 pounds; immediately after
mudding up, the bit weight would be routinely increased to 30,000 pounds. The results, you
guessed it, no significant change in ultimate deviation.  It's still hard to swallow.

The most interesting variable to evaluate was survey frequency. As mentioned, surveys were
routinely run at 15 to 30 foot intervals which meant that routinely over half of any day was
consumed running surveys describing only total deviation. (Since it was decided previously that
doglegging was the problem and deviation offered no problem, this routine practice might be
difficult to defend.)   It is logical that more surveys mean more data which would enable drilling
personnel to make better decisions and ultimately drill straighter holes. But, the holes with high
survey frequency were no straighter than those with fewer surveys.

Two questions immediately follow: (1) What is accomplished by running surveys every 15 to 30
feet?   Is  it exercise-something done routinely from habit?  (2)  If some formula, variable or
combination of variables, consistently influenced deviation, then shouldn't that condition logically
correspond with increased survey frequency and result in straighter holes? The fact that survey
frequency could in no way be correlated with deviation further suggested that even though the
rig personnel knew the condition, nothing done significantly affected the ultimate deviation.  It's
bitter, isn't it?

In summary,  it was concluded that the degree of deviation is a function only of subsurface
geology and can be correlated and predicted and that no field practice common to the Arkoma
Basin had a significant, consistent effect on the total deviation.




Copyright © 2007 OGCI/PetroSkills. All rights reserved.                                                 11-17


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 18 از 21 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
H o r i z o n t a l a n d D i r e c t i o n a l D r i l l i n g
C h a p t e r 1 1

The obvious recommendations which followed were:

        1.  Predict deviation from control wells chosen from subsurface geology.

        2.  Spot the surface location so that the bottomhole location would be acceptable.

        3. Run a square drill collar to control dogleg severity.

        4. Run optimum bit weights and rotary speeds.

        5.  Pick the best bit for drilling.

        6. Run surveys every 500 feet as required by law.

Nine wells were drilled under this philosophy.  All were development locations and anticipated
total deviation was predicted from offset information.  Bit weights were increased to 20,000 to
30,000 pounds (all available weight) in air holes and held constant. In no instance were surveys
run more than every 500 feet.  The results were impressive.  The total deviation was as
predicted from subsurface  correlations and no problems  associated  with doglegs were
encountered.

Drilling time was reduced to ⅓rd to ½ of that previously required and the number of bits required
was reduced 50 percent. The nine wells were drilled for the price of three drilled conventionally.
One well was drilled to approximately 7,000 feet and completed for less than $24,000. The
drilling contractors total invoice on one well to 7,000 feet was less than $9,000. A typical
comparison is offered as Figure 11-11.

Wells "A", "B", and "C" in Figure 11-11 are offsets and geologically similar. Well "A" represents
one of the nine previously described.  Well "B" represents an air hole drilled by the same
operator using conventional practices, and Well "C" was drilled with mud by a major operator.
As illustrated, Well "C" was drilled with mud in 30 days to 7,000 feet.  Bit weights were as high
as 50,000 pounds. The maximum measured deviation was 6½° and 33 total bits were required.
Well "B" was drilled to 7,000 feet in 22 days.  Bit weight was routinely 4,000 to 6,000 pounds.
The maximum measured deviation was 5½° and 9 bits were required.  Well "A", representing
one of the nine, was drilled to 7,000 feet in 10 days which represents a 70 percent improvement
over the time required for Well "C" and a 55 percent improvement in the time required for Well
"B". Total measured deviation at Well "A" was 9°. Well "A" required only five bits or 85 percent
fewer than Well "C" and 44 percent fewer than Well "B".





11-18                                                     Copyright © 2007 OGCI/PetroSkills. All rights reserved


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 19 از 21 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                                          H o r i z o n t a l a n d D i r e c t i o n a l D r i l l i n g
                    T h e P r o b l e m o f D e v i a t i o n a n d D o g l e g g i n g  i n R o t a r y B o r e h o l e s





                                          Figure 11-11. Bit Record

The tenth well in the series offered some interesting observations and presented the unique
opportunity to drill a well twice. The tenth was a step-out and control was poor.  In addition, a
known fault was not well defined at the location.  However, one mile offsets to the north and
west were chosen for control wells and are illustrated as Figure 11-12.

Deviation to 12° was recorded in the north offset; however, 12° is not critical in 640 acre
spacing. The north offset in Figure 11-12 illustrates the inconsistent logic related to drilling fluid
type.  Note that to 200 feet the bit weight was held from 5,000 to 15,000 pounds while gas
drilling.  After mudding up, the weight was increased from 20,000 to 30,000 pounds while the
inclination decreased from 1° to ½°.   After gas  drilling was resumed, the  bit weight was
ultimately reduced to 2,000 to 4,000 pounds.

Water below surface casing required 7 inch intermediate casing to 3,100 feet and a 6¼ inch
hole was planned to total depth.  The bottomhole assembly consisted of a  bit, Circle "C"
assembly above the bit (two integral blade stabilizers 10 feet apart), and a sleeve stabilizer at
30 feet and 5 inch drill collars.  Bit weights were 10,000 to 12,000 pounds and surveys were run
every 500 feet. Total deviation was 2° at 3,000 feet and 41° at 7,500 feet.




Copyright © 2007 OGCI/PetroSkills. All rights reserved.                                                 11-19


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 20 از 21 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
H o r i z o n t a l a n d D i r e c t i o n a l D r i l l i n g
C h a p t e r 1 1





                                        Figure 11-12. Offset Drilling

Directional surveys indicated dogleg severity as high as 3°/100 feet. No drilling problems were
encountered.  It was decided that the well had drifted in the wrong direction, crossed a fault, and
missed the pay zone; therefore, the well was plugged back to 4,900 feet and whipstocked to 1°.
No bottomhole assembly was used.   All field practices commonly associated with prudent
practice in crooked hole country were employed.  Bit weight was reduced to 1,000 to 2,000
pounds, straight hole bits were run, and surveys were run every 15 to 30 feet.





11-20                                                     Copyright © 2007 OGCI/PetroSkills. All rights reserved


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 21 از 21 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                                          H o r i z o n t a l a n d D i r e c t i o n a l D r i l l i n g
                    T h e P r o b l e m o f D e v i a t i o n a n d D o g l e g g i n g  i n R o t a r y B o r e h o l e s

Deviation after whipstocking at 5,750 feet was 2°. The deviation at 6,950 feet was 37½° and
dogleg severity was measured at 5°/100 feet. The original hole required eight days while the
final effort required sixteen days or twice as long.  All the care, slow drilling, and "safe" practices
common to the area used in the whipstocked hole did not drill a straighter hole.

Experience with this approach is limited; however,  it may well have application in hard rock
areas such as Mid-Continent region and Canada. Certainly the experience of directional drillers
in the coastal regions indicates that this approach does not have application in the coastal
areas. The recommendations for drilling in crooked hole country are as follows:

        1.  Establish control wells from subsurface geology.

        2.  Predict deviation from control wells.

        3.  Locate surface to compensate for undesired drift.

        4. Run a square drill collar above the bit to reduce dogleg severity.

        5.  Drill with optimum weights and speeds.

        6. Run surveys as required by law.

        7. Run a directional survey at total depth if severe problems are encountered.

        8. Have faith that all is being done that is within the realm of current technology.   If
          excessive problems are encountered, go forward to new technology-not backward
         50 years to fanning bottom.


SUMMARY

What's been said?   It is submitted that the drilling industry can no longer afford the luxury of
crooked holes.  The industry will no longer tolerate the penalties imposed in the past.  Very
simply, a solution must be found to any problem in any given area.  Let's not tolerate this
problem.   In the Arkoma Basin the problem was ignored.  A pendulum assembly may be
completely satisfactory elsewhere.  Let's change our thinking. Dogleg severity is the problem
and square drill collars combat dogleg severity to the best of our ability.  Deviation is not the
problem.

Experience offshore has proven that operating problems are not severe in holes intentionally
deviated to angles far in excess of naturally deviated angles anywhere in the world.  Let's quit
routinely worrying about deviation.  Let's solve this problem or learn to live with  it and quit
paying an unnecessary premium for drilling in crooked hole country.





Copyright © 2007 OGCI/PetroSkills. All rights reserved.                                                 11-21


