

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
DRILLING / HOLE PROBLEMS


FISHING


1     SAFETY


(1)    No personnel in an exposed location on the drill floor while pulling or jarring on stuck pipe.

(2)      Inspect the derrick and check for loose objects before and after jarring operations.

(3)     During all wireline operations, whether logging or fishing, personnel must keep clear of wire and
pulleys.




2    RECOMMENDED PROCEDURES


2.1     Fishing Assembly

The standard fishing assembly is:

Overshot / fishing bumper sub / DC / fishing jar / DCs / accelerator / HWDP.

Notes :  Fishing assemblies should be optimised using the JARTROP Programme

            It is essential that detailed drawings of the fishing assembly are made before RIH. Tools with
restricted internal diameters must not be run.

       The accelerator is especially recommended in deviated holes and for shallow fishing. For
additional information on this tool see Fig 1 (Bowen Jar Accelerator Weight Chart) and the Bowen
Composite Manual.

      Do not run a safety joint. Experience shows that this tool freezes when jarred. The one exception
to this rule is when a washover string is run, then a full opening safety joint (drive joint made for jarring) is
run below the standard fishing assembly so that internal cutters may be run when the washover string sticks
and has to be backed off; a junk sub can be installed on top of the washover string.

When a twist off occurs and penetration rates are high, circulate the hole clean and spot a viscous pill
before pulling out, but keep the string moving up and down to avoid causing a washout above the fish. Also
circulate as required before latching on to the fish and avoid tagging the top of the fish.

Where possible always use a spiral grapple in preference to a basket grapple.

If an overshot is run it is good practice to always run an extension.This is especially important after the fish
has been milled over, so that the grapple can catch on to unmilled pipe .

In a washed out hole, if a standard fishing assembly fails to locate the top of the fish, then attempts should
be made with either a bent single or a wall hook.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 2 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
2.2      Jarring

Note :   Safety Considerations

      No personnel in an exposed location on the drill floor while jarring.

         Inspect the derrick and check for loose objects before and after jarring operations.


Heavy pulling and jarring must be done only after the kelly is added to the string. On those rare occasions
where this is not possible, the elevator latch is to be secured by means of a rope or chain, always provided
the tool joint in the elevator has a square shoulder.

Never use an elevator when jarring on a tool joint with an 18 deg shoulder. Remove the kelly spinner (if
possible) before any jarring with the kelly is done, to avoid damage. Remove the elevators and tie the links
together.

When sustained jarring is done, the block line must be slipped at regular intervals to avoid permanent
damage to the line at the crossover points. The time interval between slipping depends on the intensity of
the jarring.

 Also consider closing the lower kelly cock when there is back pressure on the string as a result of spotting
a pill. This is to avoid back flow, or even a kick through the DP, should the pipe fail during jarring.

Regularly check the derrick and lifting equipment for loose bolts etc.

Prior to jarring always mark the string at the level of the rotary table. Tidal difference should be considered
when jarring for long periods on a floating rig.

When jarring is done with a circulating sub in the string, check afterwards that the pins of the sleeve have
not sheared due to the jarring action. Avoid jarring with an overshot, as screwing back in is preferred. In
the latter case, use one single DC below the standard fishing assembly; the proper jarring method is to
allow the jar to trip first with the required overpull (recommended maximum working load is 131,000 lb.
for 6 1/4" OD jar and maximum 122,500 lb. for 7 3/4" OD jar) before further overpull is applied.

Notes : A Jar is essentially an expansion joint with a limited longitudinal stroke and which incorporates a
restraining mechanism that enables the operator to apply considerable upward pull before the mechanism
trips to permit travel through the length of its stroke.

       The actual jarring blow is a result of streched drillpipe returning to its normal length and the
intensity of the blow is almost entirely determined by the weight of the drill collars located above the jar
which are caused to travel rapidly towards the surface when the jar trips.

      When the rapidly upward travelling drillcollars are abruptly halted by the striking surfaces of the
jar, the fish is hammered in an upward direction.

Normal procedure on commencement of jarring is to mark the pipe at table level and with the hanging
weight of the fishing string. Pull just sufficient to trip the jar then hold down the brake until the jar has
delivered the blow. Further overpull can then be applied to check for movement of the fish. If there is no
movement then feed off the stretch and reset the jar by downward movement.

Resetting the jar takes very little weight and need not be done rapidly.

The upward pull can then be increased in increments on each jarring stroke to increase the velocity of the
fishing assembly.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 3 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
Note :  Care must be exercised so as not to exceed the maximum recommended operating jarring load for
the jar in use. Maximum for the Bowen type Z  is 131,000 lb for 6 1/4 inch OD jar and maximum 122,500
lb for 7 3/4 inch OD jar

The use of an accelerator above the drillcollars of the fishing string will greatly increase the effectiveness
of the jar and is recommended in deviated wells or when fishing shallow where there is insufficient
drillpipe to give effective stretch. See JARTROP for optimising fishing string configuration and overpull.


2.3    Bowen Accelerator

The Bowen fluid accelerator is essentially a fluid spring .

In operation the fluid is compressed as tension is applied by the running string, by the travel upward of the
piston in the middle body. When the jar reaches its free stroke and trips, the sudden release of stored energy
in the accelerator accelerates the drill collars of the fishing string at tremendous and increasing velocity.

When the jar reaches the end of its stroke a blow of high impact is delivered directly to the fish. The action
is essentialy independent of the running string. The accelerator tends to confine movement primarily to the
drill collars and does not require the upward movement of the running string. This confines the impact of
the jar and drill collars to the fish where it is most effective and least damaging.

Note :  Bowen make the claim that this is regardless of depth.This is borne out by the fact that jars and
accelerators are successfully used in the fishing of stuck seal assemblies etc., from wellheads at 70ft BDF
without any detrement to the surface equipment

For recommended drill collar weight range and pull load See Fig 1 for details.


2.4     Use of Reverse Circulating Junk Basket

When using a reverse circulating junk basket it is important to tag the bottom gently and then rotate slowly
with the pump on to get junk into the centre of the hole. Gradually increase weight first to 3000 lb then to
6000 lb. with 45 rpm and circulating 250 to 300 gpm. Core approximately 4" then pick up off bottom,
circulate at a high rate back to the bottom before POOH.

Note :    It is essential that a high circulation rate is maintained to ensure sufficient jetting action is
generated at the tool to maintain the reverse circulation mode. Do not add an extension below jets of RCJB.

Note :  Before running the tool, carefully measure the distance from the bottom to the lower fingers to
ensure that the length is sufficient for coring, ie the top of a core will not come into contact with the fingers.

If a core basket is run, then after it is made up ensure that the catcher fingers can rotate freely. Also check
that the correct size of basket is used for the junk in the hole.


2.5     Spears

The standard assembly for a spear is:

Spear / spearstop / fishing bumper sub / fishing jar / DCs / accelerator / HWDP.

Notes : The spear must be equipped with a pack-off rubber if circulation is required.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 4 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
      To prevent stabbing in too deep and to make release easier, while also allowing resetting of the
jars, a stop-ring or spearstop must be spaced into the assembly. This also prevents the spear from re-
engaging deeper and deeper down with rig heave. The distance from the stop-ring to both the 7" and 9 5/8"
spear is 4 to 6 ft.

       Check the spearstop OD when it is run in open hole and use the stop only if hole conditions
permit.

       Avoid using a full circle spear, but if one has to be run, then do not use a spearstop. Refer to
manufacturers literature for operational recommendations.

When engaging the spear, ensure that a tool joint is at a workable distance above the rotary table. This may
require using pup joints.

If the spear has to be released, and knocking down on it does not free it, then install the surface jar (4 ft
stroke) below the kelly and jar down on the spear.


2.6    Bowen Surface Jar

The Bowen Surface jar is installed at surface directly below the kelly saver sub and when upward pull is
exerted the drill pipe below it is stretched. When sufficient upward pull has been exerted, the tool will trip
and the stretched drill pipe will, of course move rapidly downwards to regain its original length. This
downward force results in the weight of the drillpipe being hammered down against the stuck fish.

For this downward blow to be effective it is not necessary that two striking surfaces meet. However,
because the surface jar has a 4 ft stroke if it is run on a string which has a fishing bumper sub of 3 ft stroke,
the bumper sub will normally bottom out.


As with any jarring operation it is better to start off carefully and build up the intensity and velocity. The
surface jar can be easily adjusted by means of a control ring which controls the friction slip within the
tapered bowl of the tool.

To adjust the control ring, remove the control ring plug, and with the control ring wrench, turn the control
ring to the right to increase the trip tonnage or left to decrease it.

Caution When starting out ensure that the jar has been set for sufficient tonnage to allow safe removal of
the slips.

        Care must be taken not to increase the trip tonnage above the weight of the free pipe below the
surface jar as this will result in pulling the fish harder into the stuck point.

        Care must also be taken when taking stretch on long strings of drillpipe as the surface jar may,
when tripped, travel the full extent of its stroke and transfer some shock to the hoisting equipment and
derrick.

Note :  As with all jarring operations the normal safety rules apply.

      No personnel in an exposed location on the drill floor while jarring.

         Inspect the derrick and check for loose objects before and after jarring operations.


2.7     Lost Schlumberger Bullets


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 5 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
If bullets are lost in the hole, run in with a rock bit (conventional bit or jet bit without nozzles) and junk
sub, and along the sections where the bullets were lost, rotate and circulate, in an attempt to dislodge them
from the wall of the hole.

Tag bottom lightly while rotating slowly, then circulate and fish for junk by stopping and starting pump to
allow junk to fall into the junk sub. Drill a few feet and repeat fishing process. If this procedure fails to pick
up all the junk, then POOH. If the junk sub is full, then empty it and RIH for further fishing.

 If the junk sub is not full and there are indications of further junk on bottom, then pick up reverse
circulating junk basket, RIH and fish as detailed in Para 2.4.

When bullets are lost in the hole and further logging is required at or below where the bullets are lost, a
check trip is necessary. If casing is to be run, then drilling out and fishing for the bullets shall be carried out
on the check trip before running casing, unless hole conditions are such that this procedure could jeopardize
running the casing.


3     GUIDELINES FOR FREEING A STUCK LOGGING WIRE OR TOOLS


3.1      Introduction

Notes :  Safety Considerations

        Ensure only personnel required for the operation are allowed on the drill floor or pipe deck.

         Brief the required personnel as to the dangers of whiplash or falling wire should wire break
during the stripping operation. Ensure they go to a protected location as each stand is being run in with the
wire in tension.

      When fishing a tool with a radioactive source check the mud returns with the appropriate monitor
and only allow essential personnel in the vicinity of the mud ditch or tanks.

       The Driller and Schlumberger winch operator should be in communication via a voice activated
talk back system.

The following guidelines for freeing a stuck logging wire or tool shall be observed:

(1)     Logging companies shall have a complete set of fishing equipment on site during logging in the
open hole. The Drilling Supervisor must ensure that this is the case.

(2)       If logging equipment becomes stuck during open hole logging, there are two possibilities; either
the tool or the cable is stuck.

        Cable sticking may be caused by a dogleg (key seating) or by a high differential pressure across
the mud cake. Tool sticking may be caused by hole instability. Some indication may be obtained from a
stretch test, i.e. measuring the extension of the cable with small increments of pull (up to 2000 lb) in excess
of the cable weight.

(3)       If the cable is found (or suspected) to be stuck, further pulling would only aggravate the situation,
and therefore should not be attempted.

(4)       If the tool is thought to be stuck, then the cable should be pulled to half the breaking strength of
the weak point in an attempt to free the tool. If this fails, or if the cable is found to be stuck, then do not
pull indiscriminately and do not attempt to break the cable at the weak point.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 6 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
            It is most likely that the cable would eventually break at the point of the highest load which is at or
near surface and most of the cable will be lost down the hole, resulting in a very difficult fishing operation
or even in a junked well.

Notes :  If radioactive tools are in the hole, then extreme care must be taken not to break the cable.

      When logging equipment becomes stuck in casing the cable is normally pulled until the weak
point breaks, but this shall only be attempted if the casing diameter is small enough to allow an easy fishing
job for the tool using an overshot. If breaking the weak point could result in a difficult fishing operation,
then the overstripping method must be used.

           If a Neutron tool is stuck then the overstripping technique must always be used since it provides a
better chance of a controlled recovery and because a Neutron source left in the hole presents not only a
serious health hazard if broken up and circulated out of the well but could also result in serious logging
constraints on further wells in the area.

(5)       If an attempt to free the tool or break the weak point is unsuccessful, then the Schlumberger
overstripping technique shall be the procedure to follow.


3.2     Schlumberger Overstripping Technique


3.2.1   Equipment requirements

The following should be available:

(1)     Schlumberger Type SFT-7 fishing kit. The inventory for each of the three boxes constituting this
kit appears inside the lid of each box.

(2)   A tension meter with cable tension read out for the Driller.

(3)    An intercom between Driller and the Schlumberger winch operator.

(4)     Three hundred feet of 1/4" dia rope; to control the run of the cable going over the top sheave.

(5)    One hundred feet of 1/2" dia rope; to hold the lower sheave straight.


3.2.2    Preparations

The following preparations shall be carried out:

(1)      Prepare the overshot (see Fig 2 item A), as follows:

(a)      Inspect, lubricate and dress the Bowen series 150 overshot contained in the SFT-7 fishing kit. The
single-wicker grapple specified for the epoxy or rubber covered heads has one cutting edge. The grapple for
steel heads or bodies has several small cutting edges.

(b)     Check the top end to assure the 2 3/16" bushing is in place. This will retain the 2 1/4" hex adapter
of the lower rope socket, if the cable is dropped at the surface.

(2)      Prepare the cable for cutting (see Fig 2 item B), as follows:

          (a)      Pull up 1500 to 2000 lb over normal tension.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 7 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
(b)     Secure the cable clamp to the cable. Ensure that the proper size bushing is used.

(c)      Slack off on the cable until the clamp supports the weight of the cable.

(d)     Cut the cable at the correct place based on local experience. This is 5 to 7 feet above the rotary
table, unless the cable is key seated, where some extra length is generally needed. Secure the cut ends at the
rotary table.

(3)      Re-rig the derrick (see Fig 2 item C), as follows:

(a)     Lower the block which supports the upper sheave, for rearranging of the sheaves in the derrick.
This is necessary since the block must be used to handle the drill pipe.
        Reposition the lower sheave away from the rotary so that it will be out of the way of the
operations on the floor.

(b)    Hang the upper sheave from one of the main beams high in the derrick (usually the water table
beams ) in a position where it will not interfere with the travelling block.

(4)      Prepare the cut and thread assembly (see Fig 2 item D), as follows:

(a)       Fit rope sockets to both cut ends of the logging cable. Make up the remainder of the assembly as
shown in Fig 2 item (D), Sinker bars may be added to the catcher assembly to provide the necessary
weight.

          Fit standard rope sockets; failure of the quick fit Schlumberger slip type rope sockets has been
known.

(b)     Assemble the rope socket and overshot to the winch end of the cable and the rope socket and
spearhead to the well end of the cable, and then carry out a pull test. Latch the overshot to the spearhead
while the cable clamp remains on the cable. Mark the cable adjacent to each rope socket by a wrap of tape
and place a 5000 lb test tension on the cable for one minute.

Note :  The well end of the cable should be passed through the overshot before the hex adaptor is
replaced.


3.2.3   Manpower Requirements

In addition to the regular drilling crew the following are required:

(1)    An experienced winch operator.

(2)    One man at the rotary to engage and release the spear overshot.

(3)     The Schlumberger Engineer, who should stay on the drill floor to observe the operation.


3.2.4   Threading the cable through the drill pipe

The procedure for going into the hole is as follows (see also Fig 3):

(1)     The Driller shall pick up first stand of DP and a Floorman shall attach the correct sub
         (Fig 3 (A)).

(2)     The Driller shall signal the winch operator to pull the overshot on the logging unit end of the cable
up to the Derrickman (Fig 3 (B)).


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 8 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
(3)     The Derrickman shall put the overshot into the first stand of pipe (Fig 3 (C)). If the sinker bars
make the overshot assembly too stiff to pass the travelling block, then the assembly may be run into each
stand of drill pipe before it is picked up.

(4)    When the overshot comes through the drill pipe and sub, a Floorman shall pick up the spearhead
and feed it through the Bowen overshot and then stab it into the wireline overshot (Fig 3 (D)).

(5)     The Bowen overshot shall now be made up with chain tongs into the sub (Fig 3 (E)).

Note :  Use the maximum size guide shoe (for the hole size) on the Bowen overshot. Apart from
increasing the chance of latching on, the guide shoe acts as a centraliser when the tool enters the casing
shoe.

(6)     The winch operator shall pull up on cable and lift the cable clamp out of the rotary table (Fig 3
(F)).

(7)     Operation of the remote tension indicator shall be checked.

Caution :        Ensure That Hand Tools Are Secured And Are Not Dropped In The Hole.

(8)    When all is ready, the cable clamp shall be removed.

(9)     The make up of the Bowen overshot and the drill pipe with rig tongs shall be completed.

(10)    The length of Bowen overshot, sub and first stand shall be entered in the depth tally.

(11)    The cable tension shall be adjusted to the normal plus 2000 lb.

(12)    The Driller shall lower the stand of pipe into the well slowly, while watching the tension device.
Set the slips.

Note :  Use safety clamp/dog collar, (for at least the first ten stands) until sufficient weight of pipe has
been run.

 (13)  A Floorman shall place the 'C' plate in the slot between the r have the winch operator slack off the
cable until it is supported on the top of the DP tool joint by the 'C' plate (Fig 3 (G) and (H)).

Note :  The winch operator should put tape flags on the cable at the winch as  is necessary to return to this
same position with each further stand of drill pipe run.

(14)    The Floorman shall release the wireline overshot using the special tongs (Fig 3 (H)).

(15)    The winch operator shall pull the wireline overshot to the Derrickman who shall have another
stand of pipe ready.

(16)    The Derrickman shall again drop the wireline overshot through the drill pipe stand and a
Floorman shall attach it to the spear (Fig 3 (I)), i.e. repeat steps (3), (4) and (5).

(17)    The winch operator shall pick up on cable.

(18)   A Floorman shall remove the 'C' plate.

(19)    The cable tension shall be adjusted to the normal plus 2000 lb.

(20)    The new stand shall be made up to the DP in the rotary. Do not rotate pipe in the hole.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 9 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
(21)    The length of DP shall be entered in the depth tally.

(22)    Steps (12) to (21) shall be repeated for each additional stand of drill pipe needed to reach the fish,
taking note of the following precautions:

(a)    Go into the hole slowly, it is the only safe way.

(b)     Primary hazards are:

(i)     The cable may be dropped.

(ii)   A broken armour wire may ball up ahead of the overshot.

(iii)    The impact of the fishing tool on a bridge may cut the cable.

(iv)    The cable may double back around the Bowen overshot if it is not removed from a keyseat.

(23)     Just above the depth of the fish, the fishing tool shall be cleaned out by circulating. Circulation at
a bridge, at the fish, or during engagement of the fish, is accomplished by hanging the cable spearhead on a
bushing in a special circulating sub, i.e:

(a)     With the spearhead hanging on the 'C' plate (Fig 3 (H)), thread the circulating sub and adapter sub
over the fishing overshot. Latch the wireline overshot onto the spearhead, lift the cable and remove the 'C'
plate.

(b)    Make up subs onto the drill pipe in the rotary. Place the special bushing over the cableand into the
circulating sub. Lower the cable until the rope socket rests on the bushing. Unlatch the overshot.

(c)    Make up the kelly into the circulating sub, using appropriate crossovers.

(24)   When the overshot is a short distance from the fish, the fish may come free. In this case mud
circulation may be used to clean the overshot and then pull the logging tool into the grapple.

       The fish however, may be covered by formation solids, requiring the overshot to be circulated
down to the fishing neck. In the latter case the overshot must reach the fish with sufficient tension still in
the logging cable to prevent it going slack and looping over the rope socket.

       The original tension at the surface which includes the weight of the logging tool is known, and the
Schlumberger chart gives the elongation per 1000ft of cable for standard logging cable sizes with respect to
tool weight.

        This information is used as follows:

(a)      Pull on the logging cable with the original logging tension and check the elevation of the spear
point.

(b)    From the Schlumberger chart find the cable stretch due to weight of the logging tool in mud.

(c)     The elevation at (a) minus the stretch from (b), gives the elevation of the spear point for neutral
tension in the cable at the logging tool. Space out the string with pup joints so that the spear point will not
be below this elevation when the overshot engages the fish.

(25)     After proving, by motion of the pipe and its effect on cable tension and by pump pressure, that the
fish is engaged, the weak point may be broken as follows:


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 10 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
Note :    It is now recommended not to break the weak point until the fish is safely inside the casing shoe.
In the case of tools containing radioactive sources the weak point should not be broken, instead cable
should be cut and pulled with the pipe cutting off lengths when necessary.

(a)      Re-install the cable clamp.

(b)     Latch the elevators around the cable under the cable clamp and pull until the weak point breaks.

(c)     Check on Martin Decker for the tension at which the break occurs.

(26)    Cut the cable and remove the rope sockets.

(27)    Attach the cable in the well to the logging unit end of the cable by tying the ends together in a reef
knot, and tape the loose ends back to the logging cable to prevent them hanging up as they pass over the
sheaves.

(28)    Spool the cable into the winch. During removal of the cable the Driller may move the pipe.

(29)    Bring the pipe and fish out of the hole without rotating the pipe; rotation could disengage the fish.


3.2.5   Problems whilst stripping over the cable

Problems which may be encountered are:

(1)      Failure of the spearhead rope socket. This will leave a broken cable in the hole.

(2)       If the spearhead with rope socket and cable is accidentally dropped into the pipe, then run and
thread, with the largest applicable guide, through the overshot and down the pipe in an attempt to engage
the spear. If this fails, then pull the drill pipe using the bushing in the Bowen overshot to catch the hex
adapter.

(3)       If cable tension increases sharply, then the cable may be stuck in a keyseat and doubled back
outside the overshot. Pick up the drill pipe to cause a small decrease in tension, then increase the cable
tension and the guide should free the cable ahead of the advancing overshot.

(4)       If cable tension increases moderately fast, then a broken armour may be balling up at the overshot.

(5)       If the tension increases gradually, as is normal for a directional well, then the elevation of the
cable spear will be lower.

           If the cable spear lowers below the top of the pipe as it is advanced into the well, then a
         short length of sucker rod may be introduced between the rope socket and spear.

(6)       If a bridge is encountered, then it should be removed by circulation of mud.


4      FISHING TOOLS


4.1     Standard Wellsite Inventory

The following tools shall always be on site:

(1)     Overshots and over sized guides with grapples, baskets and extension subs to catch all sizes of
tools in the hole, including the washpipe of the bumper subs in use.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 11 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
Note :  Before running rental tools in the well e.g. turbines, core barrels, MWD tools, ensure that the
necessary fishing tools are on board and have been checked. These should be supplied by the rental tool
company unless otherwise agreed by the Rig Superintendant.

(2)     Hydraulic jars to match the DC string in use.

(3)      Fishing bumper subs (3ft stroke) to match the DC string in use.

(4)    Bowen surface jar to match the DP in use.

(5)      Accelerator to match the hydraulic jar in use.

(6)     Reverse or straight circulating junk baskets for hole sizes to be drilled.

(7)     Junk subs for hole sizes to be drilled.

(8)     Magnets to be able to fish in the 13 5/8 inch BOP stack and in subsequent casing strings (i.e. 1 x
12 inch, 1 x 10 inch, 1 x 8 inch and 1 x 5 inch magnet).

(9)     Casing spears (when running casing) c/w stop-rings and pack-off assembly for the relevant weight
of casing.

(10)    Cameron mill guide, or clean-out tool (if Cameron Wellhead used).

(11)     Fishing tools to catch Schlumberger tools (supplied by Schlumberger).

(12)    5 7/8 inch junk mill when drilling 6 inch holes.

(13)     Safety joints and tapered taps, these are optional items.

Note :  For successful fishing it is very important to know how the tools operate. The Manufacturers
Instruction Manual is a valuable aid to successful fishing.


4.2     Lead Impression Blocks

When running a lead impression block, ensure that the weight is applied only once (5000 to 8000 lb). It can
be run directly on drill pipe, and no bumper sub is required.



Revision Status


Custodian :    UEOW/1

Issue   Date    Engineer        Authorised       Description of change
/Rev

 1      19/2/88        UEAS/1/2    DOM 1, Section 5, Chapter 5.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 12 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
FORMATION HOLE PROBLEMS



1     INTRODUCTION

Hole problems most likely to arise due to the nature of the formations drilled or being drilled are as
follows:

(1)     Clay balling and balling-up of stabilizers, drill collar assemblies and bits whilst drilling long shale
sections in tertiary formations.

(2)     Unstable hole due to sloughing clays or spalling shales causing caving in of the side wall.

(3)     Side wall sticking and mud circulation losses due to high mud gradient.

(4)      Sticking due to key seats, hole bridging or packing off.


2     TERTIARY FORMATIONS

Over the North Sea area the thickness of the tertiary varies considerably and extends to 10,000ft or more.
The tertiary includes formations of the Pliocene, Miocene, Oligocene, Eocene and Palaeocene ages.

The formations of Palaeocene to Oligocene ages contain a large proportion of clay-stones and
unconsolidated clays and shales.These are called 'gumbo' clays and when in contact with water they swell
resulting in sloughs being scooped out of the side wall of the hole. To minimize such sloughing a mud
gradient high enough to counteract the swelling effect should be used.

The hydration and subsequent swelling of gumbo clays can be reduced and retarded by using inhibitive
drilling fluids like Shell polymer mud (containing potassium chloride which restricts hydration, and
polyacrylamide which encapsulates the clay particles with a waterproofing skin), or oil based muds.

Shales of Eocene and Palaeocene age are of a brittle nature and in the side wall of the hole are often subject
to mechanical stress and overpressure which causes them to spall. Such spalling can result in caving in of
the side wall of the borehole. This type of hole instability is preventable by using a high mud gradient but
not so high as to result in high drilling fluid losses, i.e. a fine balance must be kept between the mud
gradient and drilling fluid losses.

The importance of solids control while drilling through tertiary formations cannot be overemphasized. All
available solids removal equipment, e.g. shakers, desanders, desilters and clayjectors (centrifuges) should
be used and maintained at maximum efficiency.The screen size used on shakers should be the finest
possible consistent with a maximum of about 10% mud losses over the end of the screen due to screen
flooding. Ultimately, solids build-up to such an extent that large quantities of mud have to be dumped.

The viscosity of mud is a function of the interaction of particles suspended in the fluid. The interaction of
particles depends upon the quantity and size (surface area) of the particles in suspension. Bentonite clays
hydrate very easily causing an increase in surface area which causes increased interaction between particles
and results in a rapid increase of mud viscosity. The ultimate end of such interaction of particles is that they
coalesce (combine) into conglomerates, i.e. clayballs, this is especially so where fluid velocity is low, e.g.
in the riser.

When drilling or reaming tertiary formations the following points should be kept in mind:


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 13 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
(1)     Maintain maximum annular velocity by using maximum circulating rates combined with optimum
solids carrying capacity of the mud and optimum flow profile, i.e. low turbulence flow.

(2)     Use a 'clayball trap' or a small settling tank in front of the shakers.

(3)      In 12 1/4" hole do not use 9 1/2" drill collars (DC). This is to avoid erosion of the hole through
turbulent annular velocities. If possible, reduce the number of DCs by using HWDP as an alternative.

(4)     Nozzle sizes on bits shall be a minimum of 16/32" diameter so as to minimise jet velocities
causing hole problems.

(5)    When reaming:

(a)     Avoid scouring the side wall through high jet velocities and circulating at one position, i.e. keep
moving the string up and down.

(b)       If using a jet bit, then run the mud pumps at reduced speed.

(c)       If reaming is anticipated, e.g. after WOW, then use a conventional bit, increase the frequency of
check trips and drill with reduced rpm (if conditions permit).

NOTE:  If no conventional bit is available then blank off the nozzles of a jet bit and drill a central one inch
hole. The blanking off is required because the outward pointing jet nozzles would cause scouring.

NOTE: Use a four nozzle bit as standard when drilling 17 1/2" hole.

(6)    When reaming long intervals use the minimum number of drill collars and, if possible, use no
stabilizers. If the inclination of the hole necessitates the use of stabilizers then use the minimum number
that is practical.

(7)      Restrict the penetration rate so that the rate of generating solids does not exceed the rate at which
they can be removed by the solids removal equipment.

NOTE: Maximum Penetration rate should be 120 ft. per hour.

(8)     Allow adequate time to circulate the hole clean before commencing to pull out for a round trip.

(9)    When pulling out for logging or running casing do not use the rotary table to rotate the pipe in
open hole, use a pipe spinner.

(10)    Always shut down the mud pumps slowly to reduce the circulation rate gradually and avoid
aggravating hole problems.

(11)    Maintain a low percentage of solids and low water loss.

(12)   On check trips prior to running casing or in between logging trips, reduce the amount of drill
collars but leave the number of the stabilizers in use unchanged.

NOTE: Regular check trips are important offshore for maintaining the hole in good condition so that the
drill string can be pulled back to the shoe and hung off in the event of mechanical equipment failure or bad
weather conditions.

(13)      If problems are experienced with severe gas cutting (or trip gas), especially in the case of a deep
hole, where a small diameter drill string is used, circulate bottoms up after a round trip before commencing
to drill ahead. This ensures that any gas present in the hole is removed and cannot be confused with any gas


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 14 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
influx coming from the formation now being drilled. Also check the gas composition using an explosimeter
or gas detector, to check that the gas is not merely air entrapped in the string while running in.

(14)   When the string has to be pulled back into the shoe (e.g. whilst WOW) if time permits, a
         batch of good quality mud containing 3 to 5 ppb of LCM and with a water loss of 5 to 6 cc should
be spotted in open hole.

(15)   When drilling 17 1/2" hole sections in the central North Sea use a mud density of at least 600 pptf
(OEM or water based mud) provided that the 20 inch shoe is strong enough.

(16)   Do not allow mud density to decrease while drilling ahead or reaming.


3     CRETACEOUS AND OLDER FORMATIONS

Hole problems in these formations are few and generally relate to pressure control.


4     LOST CIRCULATION

Caution :     NEVER PULL OUT WHEN CIRCULATION IS LOST AND THE FLUID LEVEL
CANNOT BE SEEN.

NOTE : Refer to LCM formulations for detailed information on Lost Circulation Materials formulations
etc.

Lost circulation is not a major problem, however, the following procedure should be followed when losses
do occur:

(1)     Check surface equipment for leaks.  If this fails to show any signs of leakage then proceed as usual
in such cases, e.g. reduce mud gradient if safe to do so, and adjust the viscosity to reduce surge pressures.

(2)    When the level in the annulus is out of sight fill up the annulus with water to establish a fluid
level. Fill up with base oil if IOEM is in use. Note the fluid volume pumped, to permit calculation of the
equivalent balancing gradient.

(3)    Do not slug the pipe with heavy pills for round trips when losses have been experienced,
especially when static well conditions depend on minimal overbalance.

(4)    When losses occur during drilling in productive zones, try to decrease the mud gradient while still
maintaining a sufficient trip margin, and optimize the mud rheology (e.g. lowest practical gel, yield and
viscosity).  If spotting of LCM pills is also required, then use
         acid-soluble materials such as 'Snocal' to avoid formation impairment for future production (obtain
permission from Base first regarding use of acid in particular type of formation).

NOTE: The proposed ingredients for mixing a Snocal LCM pill are as follows :

(a) Seawater.

(b) 1 lb/bbl caustic soda.

(c) 3 lb/bbl CMC EHV or 1 to 1 1/2 lb/bbl HEC (e.g. celosize).

(d) Snocal 3ML (fine chalk) (Approx 150 sacks in (total for a 100 bbl

(e) Snocal G2 (coarse chalk) pill.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 15 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
(5)      Snocal, both fine and coarse, to be added until the gradient of the pill is equal to the
      minimum mud gradient in use. Viscosity will then be approximately 100 sec MF.

NOTE: The ratio of coarse to fine Snocal depends on the severity of the losses. The more severe the
losses, the greater the proportion of coarse Snocal. For more details see LCM formulations

(6)     For light circulation losses, experienced before drilling into a productive zone, (except when using
IOEM) initially attempt to cure this using cellophane flakes and mica.    If losses continue or circulation is
not regained, then spot a pill of approx 50 bbl of the following constituents:

(a)      Seawater.

(b)      Bentonite 15 lb/bbl.

(c)    CMC-HV 2 to 4 lb/bbl.

(d)     Nut plug (medium) 15 lb/bbl.

(e)     Mica (fine) 20 lb/bbl.

(f)    CMC-LV 2 to 4 lb/bbl.

NOTE: The maximum concentration of bentonite or other additives which can be pumped through 3 x 16
nozzles is 25 to 30 lb/bbl.

(7)       If heavy losses are experienced, then spot a pill with coarse LCM and follow it with a medium to
fine pill to bridge off on top of the coarse pill.

(8)       If LCM pills fail to cure heavy losses, then the use of a cement plug shall be considered. The
formula for such a plug shall be advised by the Production Chemist.

(9)       If the depth at which losses are occurring cannot be determined then a casing pressure test using a
packer should be considered (losses can occur through a hole worn through casing).  Discuss the proposal
with Base before testing casing.

NOTE: Regular checks of the ditch magnet for iron filings may give indication of casing wear.

(10)      If pills have to be spotted then consider leaving out drill collars and stabilizers from the BHA so as
to avoid swabbing or disturbing LCM pills when moving the BHA past or through the spotted pills.


5     DRILLING THROUGH DEPLETED RESERVOIRS

There is an increased risk of differential sticking when drilling through depleted reservoir formations. The
mud gradient required to exert a minimum of 200 psi overbalance at the depleted sand formations having
the highest formation pressure gradient, could result in an excessive overbalance at other levels in the
reservoir zone.

To minimise the occurrence of pipe sticking in depleted reservoirs (and minimize loss of expensive
downhole equipment) the following guidelines apply:

(1)      Drill 8 1/2" hole with oil based mud and minimum overbalance, unless instructed otherwise by
Base.

(2)      Drill 8 1/2" hole with PDC (Stratopax) bit and a turbine or mud motor.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 16 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
(3)     Core 8 1/2" hole using PDC (Stratopax) core bits, a stabilized core barrel and a mud motor.

(4)    Do not use drill collars below the top sands (unless specified by Base). Use HWDP for weight on
bit.

NOTE:  If drill collars have to be used then run a stabilizer on top of every DC single.

(5)      In general, do not carry out wireline surveys below the top sands, but if required, then great care
must be taken to avoid sticking. MWD surveys, through and below a reservoir, are necessary in most
cases for angle control but there is normally no need for azimuth control so no nonmagnetic assembly
should be included above a MWD tool.

NOTE:  If azimuth surveys are required, then nonmagnetic HWDP shall be used; do not use nonmagnetic
drill collars.

(6)     Use a drilling jar, generally positioned between the HWDP and turbine, but if drill collars are
required then position it on top of the drill collar string.

(7)    As far as is practical, keep the pipe moving.

(8)    Do not let the mud gradient increase unnecessarily.

(9)    To overcome differential sticking in hydrocarbon formations another frequently used assembly is
the placement of a second jar in the drill string which will always be above the topmost sands when drilling
sand shale sequences.



Revision Status


Custodian :    UEOW/1

Issue   Date    Engineer        Authorised       Description of change
/Rev

        19/02/88       UEAS/1/2    DOM 1, Part 2, Section 5, Chapter 3.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 17 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
JARRING

Studies have been conducted by KSEPL into jarring principles (upward only) and the effect on impact
force at the stuck point of varying the placement of the Jar (or Jar & Accelerator) in a given drillstring.
These have led,  first, to the development of the computer program "JARTROP", which is available as part
of the "OSCP" computer package; second, to several rules-of-thumb that appear to be true for most cases
on the position of the jar and accelerator ; and third, to a performance evaluation on jars and accelerators
from several manufacturers.

As JARTROP is still user un-friendly, it is not recommended for general use. Should you have specific
queries on the use/placement of jars/accelerators, please contact your BU's Well Technology Liaison
Engineer.

The following are recommendations offered as general rules of thumb, based on experiences over a period
of 30 months using JARTROP.



1       Placement of Drilling Jar

The border between the first two cases below can not be defined but is dependent on the
individual well and BHA.



1.1      Vertical and Moderately Deviated Wells

For BHA's in vertical and moderately deviated wells, the jarring force is optimised by placing
the jar near to the top of the drill collars with only one drill collar above the jar. This is
independent of BHA length as it is the length of collars above the jar that is critical. This agrees with
experience-learnt common practice.


1.2     Highly Deviated and Horizontal Wells

For BHA's in highly deviated wells, the jarring force is optimised by placing the jar near to the
top of the heavyweight drillpipe with only one heavyweight above the jar. This also agrees with common
practice, since if the jar was placed in the drill collars there would be a severe risk of becoming stuck above
the jar, thus rendering it useless.


1.3     Use of Two Jars

The combination of two similar jars, one near the top of the drill collars and the other near the
top of the heavyweight drillpipe, is not recommended as it is unlikely to give any jarring
advantage and is likely to result in jar damage.


2      Use of Drilling Accelerators

Drilling accelerators are designed for use in a drilling BHA in combination with a compatible drilling jar.
Two designs are presently available from Weir Houston:


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 18 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
-        Single Acting Drilling Accelerators : are only capable of increasing upward jarring force and will
in fact decrease downward jarring force.

-       Double Acting Drilling Accelerators : are capable of increasing both upward and downward
jarring forces.

The additional feature of the double acting drilling accelerator makes it an ideal canditate for areas where
there is judged to be a high probability of getting both differentially and mechanically stuck. The double
acting drilling accelerator is therefore preferred to the single acting drilling accelerator. Accelerators are
recommended in some difficult hole sections on platform installations as a standard drilling BHA
component.

Placement of the Drilling Accelerator :



2.1      Vertical and Moderately Deviated Wells

The jarring force is optimised by placing the accelerator near to the top of the drill collars with only one
drill collar above the accelerator. Three drill collars should be placed betrween the jar and the accelerator.

In order for the system to function correctly, there will be a minimum overpull requirement at the
accelerator.

Note :  A jar - accelerator combination can generate forces that exceed the tensile yield of some of the
bottom hole assembly components.  It is therefore prudent that in all cases the position of the accelerator
isverified with your BU's Well Technology Liaison Engineer.


2.2     Highly Deviated Wells and Horizontal Wells

The jarring force is optimised by placing the accelerator near to the top of the heavyweight drillpipe with
only one HWDP above the accelerator. Three HWDP's should be placed between the jar and the
accelerator.

In order for the system to function correctly, there will be a minimum overpull requirement at the
accelerator.

Note :  A jar - accelerator combination can generate forces that exceed the tensile yield of some of the
bottom hole assembly components.  It is therefore prudent that in all cases the position of the accelerator is
verified with your BU's Well Technology Liaison Engineer.


3       Placement of Fishing Jar & Accelerator

Should any dedicated fishing strings be run, an accelerator/jar combination should always be run to
maximise the jarring forces within the constraints imposed by the yield of the fishing string and the fish.

The magnitude of the jarring force is inversely related to the length of drill collars between the jar and the
accelerator.  It is not possible to offer guidelines on this for any size of fishing string as it is very much
dependent on each individual case. The length of drill collars between the jar and accelerator can be
optimised using "JARTROP", which is available as part of "OSCP", but is presently user un-friendly.  It is
thus advised that you seek assistance from your BU's Well Technology Liaison Engineer.


Revision Status


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 19 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
Custodian :    UEOW/55

Issue   Date    Engineer        Authorised       Description of change
/Rev

All-in-1 29/6/89 G. Williams             Reference : UEAW/5/89/019

Am 01  18/1/91 T. de Meyer     G. Williams     Adapted to Hypertext Format. Updated to include
details on accelerators


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 20 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
PREVENTING STUCK PIPE




1     INTRODUCTION

The following procedures have been adjusted to be in line with the Anti-Stick Policy. Reference should
also be made to the 'ABC of Stuck Pipe' and any Supplements.

Stuck Pipe accounts for a large portion of non productive time (NPT) in Shell Expro's drilling operations
and is third highest on the list of 'chronic waste'. Although concern regarding this issue is not new, recent
developments in drilling operations such as high angle, long reach wells, horizontal wells, phasing out of
oil base mud and indeed the requirement to reduce operating costs, have re-emphasised the need for
increased efforts to reduce stuck pipe cases. In August 1990 a Quality Improvement Project was started
with the aim to assist in drastically reducing this chronic waste.

The following root causes for stuck pipe within Expro were quoted in the July 1991 Stuck Pipe report:

-      The avoidance of stuck pipe does not always receive sufficient priority during well design,
equipment selection and programme execution.
-      The drilling operations team do not always adequately interpret and react to hole deterioration and
sticking signals.
-       There is no process available for organisational learning from stuck pipe incidents.
-      The lack of standard terminology and descriptions of concepts is impeding communications and
learning.
-        Solids is the predominant Sticking Mechanism overall.

Interim solutions were identified to be:

-        Issue a reference document containing definitions and concepts. (ABC of Stuck Pipe)
-        Increase annular velocities in 17 1/2" and larger holes to at least 1000 GPM.
-       Reduce BHA-to-borehole contact in 8 1/2" hole through improved 'stand-off'.
-        Set up training courses to increase awareness.
-        Increased use of computer packages (DRD-BHA analysis, drag & torque prediction).
-       Improve the availability of 'anti-stick' related information in well programmes.

Through the publishing of the booklet 'ABC of Stuck Pipe' and autopsies of stuck pipe cases the general
awareness was raised and already a significant reduction in the amount of stuck pipe cases has been
achieved by operational staff. Stuck pipe autopsies to date however indicate that additional attention
should be given to:

-       Communication.
-     Mud weight model (Bore hole stability).
-       Hole cleaning.
-       Tripping procedures.
-      Use of drag charts.

The procedures in this document are written in line with the booklet 'ABC of Stuck Pipe' and are a
combination of the Anti-Stick team findings, audit results and existing sound drilling practices.


2     CAUSE OF STUCK PIPE


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 21 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
2.1     General

Stuck pipe can be defined as a situation where part of a drill string is stationary at the 'stuck point', and the
maximum forces applied to that part of the drill string, cannot bring it back into motion.

When considering a drill string which is run into a cased and perfectly clean hole, the downhole forces
acting on this drill string, can be summarised as:

-       Gravity forces
-      Buoyancy forces
-        Friction forces (Torque & Drag)

During the process of drilling, cuttings and solids are generated which may not be removed sufficiently by
circulation and the drilled hole may not be in gauge due to ledges, washouts, etc. These type of conditions
are likely to cause additional forces in the form of overpull and/or set-down and/or incremental torque.
Good drilling practices are aimed at avoiding (or at least minimising) these additional forces, not only to
avoid 'wear and tear' on equipment, but more importantly, to reduce the chances of stuck pipe.

The conditions that cause overpull, set-down or incremental torque are referred to as Sticking Mechanisms,
which can be categorised into:

-       Geometrical                                  :        Related to dimensional problems
-        Solids                                           :        Related to problems caused by solid particles
-        Differential Sticking                      :        Related to differential sticking problems

The booklet 'ABC of Stuck Pipe' ( Chapter 4 ) explains the possible scenario's that fall under each of the
three main categories above.

To what extent sticking mechanisms will be created during the course of drilling is dependent on a large
amount of variables such as borehole stability, hole cleaning, drill string design, formation related aspects,
etc., which may be different for every situation.  It is clear however, that the key to stuck pipe prevention
lies in minimising, if not avoiding the effect of sticking mechanisms at every stage of the drilling process,
from well design to completion.


2.2      Shell Expro Data

Data from autopsy reports to date ( 16 cases from September '91 to February '93 ) indicate that the main
reasons for stuck pipe in Shell Expro's drilling operations is Solids :


       Hole Size        Sticking Mechanism      Occurrence (cases)
           ----------------      ----------------------------------         ---------------------------------
        17 1/2" Solids  100%  ( 4 )
                Geometrical       -
                   Differential        -
     ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
       12 1/4"  Solids  57%    ( 4 )
                Geometrical    29%    ( 2 )
                   Differential    14%    ( 1 )
     -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
       8 1/2"   Solids  50%    ( 3 )
                Geometrical    17%    ( 1 )
                   Differential    33%    ( 2 )
     -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 22 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
        6"      Solids   -
                Geometrical    50%    ( 1 )
                   Differential    50%    ( 1 )


TOTAL 19 CASES:     SOLIDS 58%   ( 11 )
           GEOMETRICAL 21%   ( 4 )
            DIFFERENTIAL 21%   ( 4 )


3     PLANNING THE WELL


3.1     Well Proposal Stage

The well proposal consolidates the petroleum engineering requirements for the well.  It is based on a
review of geological, petrophysical and reservoir engineering data and prescribes the well objectives,
identifies geological correlation wells and predicts the lithology, fluids and pressures that will be
encountered.

The proposal may contain cautionary remarks regarding potential drilling problems if these were identified
during the data research of the proposal.


3.2     Well Programming Stage

Any well proposal requires an initial assessment of potential problem areas which may be:

-       Shallow dog legs ( high drag and torque values )
-      Long open hole sections  ( time dependent formation stability )
-       Casing setting depths  ( coverage of troublesome formations and/or build-up sections )
-       Hole angle  ( Mud weight requirements, Hole cleaning )
-     Mud weight  ( Borehole stability / Differential sticking concerns )
-     Mud Properties (Borehole stability / Hole cleaning)

Once accepted, well design can be commenced. At this stage stuck pipe prevention will involve detailed
study of :

-        Stratigraphical prognosis / Formation pressures / Casing depths / Mud overbalance.
-        Offset well data / Anticipated hole problems.
-       Borehole stability / Hole cleaning efficiency / Mud and cement programme.
-       Well trajectory / B.H.A. design / Surveying requirements.
-        Anticipated drag / torque/ Minimum overpull margins at section TD.

Finally the Drilling Programme can be completed and will contain the essential information for the rig team
to successfully and safely drill the well.

Note:   Drilling Programmes must be clear and well structured, using a standardised format. Without
proper communication through this important document the rig team may not be sufficiently aware of
possible hole problems and the required remedial actions.



3.3      Preparation Stage


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 23 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
In this phase the drilling programme is translated into availability of equipment, mud, cement, etc. and the
rig team is geared up for drilling the well. Here the rig team must be aware of any potential problems in
order to ensure availability of equipment for remedial actions. Communications will benefit by a pre-spud
meeting, not only prior to the start of a well in the office, but also at the start of every hole section, on the
rig.


4      ANTI-STICK DRILLING PROCEDURES


4.1     General

(1)      Drilling programmes must be clear on all aspects and should identify any potential problems
(anticipated, or derived from offset data) and the proposed remedies.

(2)      Drilling operations are to be carried out according to the parameters mentioned in the drilling
programme, unless superseded by amendments.

(3)     Ensure drill crews (not only the driller) are aware of potential problems and have specific orders
on how to respond to these problems, should they occur.

(4)    Do not continue drilling if required drilling parameters cannot be maintained due to operational
constraints (screen blinding, pump inefficiency, etc.) or due to lack of materials, causing inferior mud
condition, etc.

(5)    Make check trips when drilling through troublesome formations, and any cutting beds that may
exist higher up the hole. The required frequency of check trips is dependent on hole conditions.

(6)       If in doubt regarding hole conditions higher up the hole, make check trips to the previous casing
shoe.

(7)     Use minimum B.H.A.'s,  i.e. do not use more drill collars or stabilisers than absolutely necessary.
Only the first three stabilisers above the bit determine deviation control.

(8)     Where differential sticking may occur and drill collars have to be run, avoid drill collar to
borehole contact by using stabilisers. Higher hole angles require shorter stab spacing to reduce drill collar
sag. (where deviation control is not critical, use undergauge stabs)

(9)    When in open hole, keep the drill string moving whenever possible.


4.2     Running in Hole

(1)      Prior to running the B.H.A. ensure all tool dimensions have been recorded and stabilisers have
been calipered

(2)      Prevent high surge pressures by lowering the drill string at moderate speed, especially in small
hole sizes and when high mud weights are used.

(3)     While running in, record the up and down string weight every + 1000 ft.

(4)     Take extra precautions when running a stiffer B.H.A. through dog legs (build-up and drop-off
sections).


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 24 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
(5)    When running into resistance (set-down), pull back, circulate out of hole or if need be jar up in
order to get back to a good part of the hole above the problem area. Be prepared to start washing or
reaming down.

(6)     Always circulate/wash the last 50 to 100 ft. to bottom.


4.3     Washing and Reaming Down

(1)     Washing down will generally give an earlier indication of the problem area compared to reaming.

(2)       If reaming is required in soft formations, use a low RPM and moderate lowering speed to avoid
sidetracking. Never rotate too long at one position thereby allowing the bit to cut into the side of the hole.

(3)    When washing/reaming down through solids (fill), use moderate lowering speeds and use the
drilling circulating rate. Monitor pump pressures carefully. At the first signs of a pack-off (reduced return
flow, followed by pump pressure rising), stop the pump, bleed off and regain circulation and pipe
movement before continuing.

(4)      Circulate any solids well clear of the B.H.A. before making connections.


4.4      Drilling


4.4.1    Drilling Ahead

(1)     Use controlled drilling rates to avoid overloading of the mud in the annulus with cuttings.

(2)     Monitor cutting returns over the shale shakers to assess the hole cleaning efficiency. Circulate
hole cleaning pills when required.

(3)      Drilling circulation rates shall be as follows: (The higher values are for deviated holes)

17 1/2" hole and larger     -         >1000     GPM
12 1/4" hole                             -       700 - 750     GPM
 8 1/2" hole                             -       450 - 500     GPM

(4)     Where high flow rates interfere with deviation requirements ( lack of build-up tendency ) use
lower flow rates while drilling for short periods followed by pulling back some 30 ft. to remove cuttings at
high flow rate

(5)     Avoid creating excessive dog legs. In soft formations they are a potential source for key seats and
dog legs at shallow depth cause high drag and torque values for the remaining drilling operations.

(6)     Never drill down the full length of the kelly or stand. Leave enough travel to re-set the jars should
this be required.

(7)     Avoid stalling of the drill string, especially where the risk of differential sticking is present.
Always set the drawworks torque limit at least 2000 ft.lbs. above the maximun observed drilling torque,
providing this torque does not exceed the pipe make-up torque.
.

4.4.2   Making Connections


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 25 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
(1)      Circulate prior to connections at the drilling circulating rate to clear cuttings from the Drill Collar
area.

(2)     Wipe the hole prior to connections, especially around the 'slip area'.

(3)       If connections are repeatedly 'tight' consider making a check trip.

(4)    When stuck after a connection (pipe stationary while next single is installed on the kelly), work
the pipe starting with maximum set down weight and if necessary use torque or jarring down action.  If this
is unsuccessful after two or three attempts, apply maximum overpull.

(5)    When stuck with a top drive and the bit is on bottom, apply maximum overpull.


4.4.3   Taking Surveys

(1)      Prior to surveying with MWD, circulate to clear cuttings from the BHA.

(2)       If a survey fails, circulate at full rate to clear settled cuttings from BHA while moving the string
before taking another survey.

(3)       If a single shot survey barrel is used, pull to the shoe before fishing the barrel.

(4)    When stuck after a connection (pipe has been stationary), work the pipe starting with maximum
set down weight and if necessary use torque or jarring down action.  If that is unsuccessful after two or
three attempts, apply maximum overpull.



4.5      Circulating

(1)     While drilling, monitor cutting returns at the shakers to assess hole cleaning efficiency.

(2)     Before pulling out, use 'cutting bottom up' time to circulate the hole clean or longer if the shale
shakers still show a significant amount of solids returns.

(3)      In deviated holes, pipe movement and high rotary speeds will assist hole cleaning by stirring up
any 'cutting beds'.

(4)    On high angle holes, if viscous pills do not appear to improve hole cleaning, use low/high vis pills.


4.6     Pumping out of Hole / Backreaming

(1)    When pumping out or backreaming, use full circulation rates and pull out slowly. If a cutting bed
exists, it will be stirred up by the backreaming action and excessive amounts of solids may be pumped up
the hole.

(2)    On all pumping out and backreaming operations, be aware of reduction in return flow and pump
pressure increase which may suddenly occur due to hole pack-off.


4.7      Pulling out of Hole

(1)     Before pulling out, ensure the hole has been circulated clean.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 26 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
Note:    'Clean' refers to minimal cutting returns at the shale shakers. In high angle holes this may require
several full circulations and the use of hole cleaning pills.

(2)    Know the expected string weight and up/down drags at all times. Make use of drag charts if
available.

(3)    When overpull is encountered, initially limit this overpull to 30,000 lbs. or half the BHA weight if
less. A gradual increase in overpull indicates the presence of solids. Ensure that the pipe is free to move
down after every increase in overpull.

(4)     Where overpulls become significant, consider using the top drive or kelly to clear the tight hole
section (see 4.6 - Pumping out / Backreaming)



Revision Status


Custodian :    UEOW/1

Issue   Date    Engineer        Authorised       Description of change
/Rev

Original 1987              DOM-1

Am 01  14/09/92 UEOW/172    UEOW/55       Adjusted contents to be in line with the Anti-Stick
policy and 'ABC of Stuck Pipe'
Am 02  15/03/92 UEOW/172              Included Anti-stick QIP efforts and findings. Re-arranged
Anti-stick procedures by operation type.

Amo3  09/06/93 UEOW/112    UEOW/55      Revised layout to be in line with Anti-Stick policy.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 27 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
STUCK PIPE PROCEDURES




1     STUCK DRILL STRING OR CASING


1.1      Preparations to Pull

Before pulling stuck drill pipe or stuck casing, the following preparations shall be carried out :

(1)     Ensure that all surface pulling equipment is in good working condition, and that the required pull
will not exceed the maximum allowable safe working rating of the weakest link in the pulling equipment.

(2)     Check the Martin Decker weight indicator, and its anchor as follows :

(a)     Check fluid level of cylinder or sensator as shown in Fig 1.

      To fill the system use W-15 fluid and YA-2 hand pump in the sensator or cylinder, bleeding air at
the tubing connection on the gauge.

(b)     Check anchor :

(i)     Mount cylinder or sensator with outlets on top.

(ii)     The anchor shall be free to move, and therefore should be greased at regular intervals and the
anchor pins kept free of paint and corrosion. At least once each week the pins should be pulled, cleaned
and greased.

(iii)    Check anchor movement by using a pinch bar between the wheel and the stop of the anchor, apply
force and the gauge should move rapidly.

(c)     Check gauge :

(i)     Read the proper dial which indicates the number of lines strung.

(ii)      Pointers must be free to move and not touching the glass, dial, each other, or dial screws.

(iii)    The damper must be open enough to allow fluid flow but closed enough to prevent severe
movement. Close vernier for trips and when jarring.

(d)     Check hose :

(i)     Look for leaks and make certain that the hose is not pinched.

(ii)    When moving the indicator break the hose at the self-sealing union 'C'          beside the
sensator or cylinder (see Fig 1).


1.2     Stuck Drill String


1.2.2    Effective Pull on Stuck Drill Pipe


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 28 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
When determining the pull at the stuck point on drill pipe the actual weight of the string in air shall be used
and not the indicated weight as recorded by the weight indicator.

Worked Example

Depth = 9765ft

Weight of drill collars in air:
743ft of 6 1/2 inch x 3 inch DC x 89 lb/ft         = 66,100 lb

Weight of drill pipe in air :
9022ft of 5 inch DP x 19.5 lb/ft                             = 175,900 lb

Total weight of string in air                                = 242,000 lb

Indicator reading                                                    = 205,000 lb

Weight of hook, block, swivel, etc                    = 27,000 lb

Pull reported at 100,000 lb over
indicator reading                                                    = 305,000 lb

Less weight of hook, block, swivel, etc                 = 27,000 lb

Effective pull on string                                         = 278,000 lb

Assuming that pipe is stuck on bottom
then the effective pull at the stuck point is

278,000 - 242,000 lb (no pipe buoyancy)                = 36,000 lb

In order to apply a pull of 100,000 lb at
the bit the indicator reading would have to be

242,000 + 27,000 + 100,000 lb                             = 369,000 lb

This would mean that the pull on the pipe
amounts to :

369,000 - 27,000 lb                                                  = 342,000 lb

Routine field practice is to pull on stuck pipe up to 85% of the minimum yield strength of the pipe, unless
differently advised by Base. The Table in 1.2.3 gives minimum yield strength of new and 80% condition
DP.


1.2.3   Minimum Yield Strength of DP
_____________________________________________________________
DP Size DP Weight Type  New  80% Condition
(inch)   (lbs/ft)  Class (1000 lb)  (1000 lb)
_____________________________________________________________

5 1/2   24.7   E    497     391
5     19.5   E    395    311
5     19.5   S135   712     581


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 29 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
4 1/2   16.6   E    330     260
4 1/2   16.6  G    462     364
4 1/2   20.0   S135   742     581
3 1/2   13.3   E    271     212
3 1/2   13.3  G    380     297
3 1/2   15.5   S135   581     451
2 3/8   6.65  E    138     107
_____________________________________________________________

Note :  Routine field practice is to pull on stuck pipe up to 85% of the minimum yield strength of the pipe,
unless differently advised by Base.


1.3     Stuck Casing

If a casing string sticks during running in and cannot be freed, the safety of the well and the casing string
design will be adversely affected. The following possibilities have to be considered, but all action must be
agreed to by Base before being implemented :

(1)       If the shoe is not too far from the intended setting depth and is not situated in a weak or unsuitable
formation (e.g. sand), then the casing can usually be cemented in place and serve its original purpose. The
cementing proposals and subsequent casing depths may have to be amended.

(2)       If the shoe is too far from the intended setting depth, or is situated in an unsuitable formation, or
certain critical formations are not covered by the casing, then it is very likely that an extra casing string will
have to be run to serve the intended purpose of the stuck casing. Whether the well can be completed, or
will be abandoned, depends very much on whether :

(a)     an extra casing string can be accommodated, and

(b)     whether the reduced final hole or casing size is acceptable.

Note :   If a casing string has to be cemented higher than originally intended, the design for collapse will
be more than safe, but the design for burst may well be below the design safety limit due to lower
formation strength at the shallower shoe depth.

Although stuck casing means that the casing cannot be landed on its hanger (pre-installed in the string)
emergency hangers and seal assemblies are available to be installed around the casing.

To install an emergency hanger system the BOP stack is removed, but only after the surface cement
samples are hard and the casing has been mechanically cut. The casing must be cut mechanically at a
height such that there is sufficient length of casing above the hanger to allow normal installation of the seal
assembly.

It must be borne in mind that when the BOP stack is lifted the well has no blowout protection. A four hour
flow check of the annulus beforehand shall be performed and during the job the annulus shall be kept
topped up to enable detection of the slightest sign of flow or fluid loss.

Although it is against normal operating principles to install a casing patch on a development well
production string, should the need be accepted due to special circumstances, then the procedure to be
followed is that stated in the Casing Patch Document. (Refer to SIPM Note of 11Jan 1986 for criteria to be
met for patching a production casing string.)

Note :   If there are angle changes in the hole or internal pressure inside the casing, or both, then the
allowable surface load shall be restricted by the factor values stated in API Bulletin 5C2.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 30 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
For angle changes only, the reduction in allowable load can be calculated as follows :

Reduction in allowable load = 63 x D x W x A lb

where :
     D     =       diameter of pipe, in inches
    W     =       weight of pipe lb/ft (below angle change)
     A     =       angle change in degrees/ 100ft.

Note :   If the casing is stuck in such a way that no circulation is possible, then the string can be
pressurised and then be bled off (before applying extra pull), thus providing an upward force below the
floats, in addition to the pull applied at surface.


Note :  A rule of thumb formula for determining the pipe body yield strength of casing is :

                    F = 0.29 x W x Y lb

                      where :

           W = weight of casing in lb/ft
               Y = yield stress in psi

       Example :

       Take new 7 inch C75-32 lb/ft casing
      Minimum yield is : 0.29 x 32 x 75,000 = 698,800 lb
         Halliburton Book gives : 699,000 lb.


2     FLUID PILLS TO FREE STUCK PIPE


2.1     Fresh Water in a Salt Section

When stuck in salt, circulate freshwater around. The usual amount is between 30 and 50 bbl. Depending on
the type of mud in the hole a 5 bbl spacer of base oil (e.g. Shell D70) ahead and behind can be used.
Displace the freshwater slowly around the drill collars, to increase contact time (2 bbl/min), and stop for 5
minute soaking periods after the first 5 and then 10 barrels have been pumped.

Notes :  Maintain maximum pull while circulating.

           If the mud gradient is between 450 and 500 pptf it is unnecessary to weight the pill unless advised
differently by Base.


2.2     Pipelax when Differentially Stuck

If stuck in any formation where differential sticking is possible (i.e. high differential pressure between
formation pressure and mud gradient in hole) then a pipelax pill shall be spotted as quickly as possible after
the string sticks.

The procedure shall be as follows :

(1)     Clean out pill tanks.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 31 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
(2)    Pump in base oil; an amount equal to twice the annular volume around the DCs plus enough left
inside the string to move the pill by 1/2 to 1 bbl every half an hour over a six hour period (ie plus 6 to 12
bbl).

(3)    Add 1 to 2 gallons of pipelax for each barrel of base oil.


Notes :  If the mud gradient is between 450 and 500 pptf it is unnecessary to weight the pill unless advised
differently by Base.

           If a weighted pill is required then add SF100 or Invermul or Vertoil in a concentration of 45 sacks
per 100 bbl and then add baryte as required.

(4)    Pump the pipelax pill into the hole and displace until the 100% annular excess is around the DCs.
Stop pumps and displace 1/2 to 1 bbl every half an hour. Work pipe and torque-up continuously during the
soaking.  Immediately the pipe is free start rotating and circulating.

Notes
1 :      Before displacing the pipelax pill through the bit, take differential pressure reading.  If the well
should flow this pressure can be used as     the initial choke pressure. Killing the well would then
continue by the constant drill pipe pressure method.

2          It is vital that considerable diligence be given to mixing a weighted pipelax pill to ensure that the
pill has sufficient body to hold the baryte in suspension while there is no circulation.

3    A maximum of 24 hours after a pipelax pill is in place is an acceptable time period for working a
stuck pipe. A decision on whether to continue working a stuck pipe after such a period shall be taken by
Base.

4      While use of a pipelax pill is generally associated with water based muds it should not be
disregarded for similar application with IOEM.

5         If the formation to mud differential pressure is high, then consider reducing the mud gradient in
the hole before circulating a pipelax pill. The level of reduction will obviously differ from well to well
because of different responses to mud gradient changes (e.g. swelling shales).

6         If acid is used as a freeing agent, then considerable care must be exercised especially regarding
handling, tanks used and use of protective safety equipment.


3     DETECTION OF STUCK POINT


3.1     General

Once a drill string has become stuck, it is possible to determine the deepest point at which a back-off can be
achieved by stretching the string and using stretch charts for drill pipe.

A more accurate method of free point detection involves using the Schlumberger Stuck Pipe Indicator Tool
(SIT), or Free Pipe Indicator (FPI), or the Atlas Wireline Free Pipe Indicator (FPI).

By applying stretch and torque on the pipe, the tools can determine elongation and rotation at any depth by
means of strain gauges located between two spring loaded or hydraulic centralisers. A plot of depth versus
the percentage of surface torque and pull transmitted down hole will show the deepest point at which the
string is free (see Fig 1).


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 32 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
3.2     Procedure for Running the SIT/FPI

(1)     Before running the tool, the spring centraliser pads should be checked by the WSDE, both for
wear and for the correct pressure for the particular size of drill pipe. All IDs of the string should be
checked to ensure the tool can pass through.

(2)     Determine approximately where the pipe is stuck by measuring the stretch of the pipe.

(3)     Using the logging company tables, determine the stretch and torque that have to be applied to the
pipe.

(4)      Pull up to the neutral weight of the pipe above the stuck point. Mark the pipe at this point. Label
this Mark No 1.

(5)      Pull up to the neutral weight of the pipe plus the stretch required. Label this Mark No 2.

(6)      After this the Martin Decker gauge is not used but still observed. All tensions are referred to by
the marks on the DP.

(7)    Run the tool down to ± 200ft above the expected stuck point where it is certain that the pipe is
free. Take the stretch measurement first, followed by the torque measurement. Check the readings to
confirm that the tool is not slipping and that the torque has worked itself down.

(8)     Measure the stretch and torque below the stuck point, as close as possible.

(9)     Take further measurements between the lowest free point and the highest stuck point. Take as
many measurements as possible around the stuck point.

(10)    The WSOE and Drilling Supervisor should coordinate the operations of the Driller and the
Logging Engineer.


3.3     Applying Torque and Stretch

It is important that the amount of torque and stretch applied each time a reading is taken is constant. Thus
Marks No 1 and 2 described in theProcedure for Running the SIT/FPIsection are used to avoid variations
due to pipe friction in the hole. The procedure is as follows :

(1)      Pull the pipe up to Mark No 2 and take the reading.

(2)     Release the tension in the pipe, go down below Mark No 1 and pull back up to Mark No 1.

(3)     Drop in the slips without moving the pipe if possible (if not using the kelly).

(4)     Apply the required torque. Work down the torque by yo-yoing the pipe while using tongs to hold
the torque in the string. Pull up to Mark No 1 before taking the measurement. Keep all non-essential
personnel off the drill floor during this operation. Release the torque. Report the number of turns that
come out of the pipe. Work the pipe to remove all torque. Pull back up to Mark No 1.4

A copy of instructions (1) to (4) should be provided to the Driller, and when taking readings, the Logging
Engineer should refer to each instruction by number. This avoids any confusion and ensures that the
operations are properly repeated.  It is essential that when measuring stretch, there is no torque in the drill
pipe and vice versa.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 33 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
3.4      Selecting the Back-Off Point


3.4.1    Vertical holes

Usually there is a very sharp change from free to stuck pipe, and in this case the first free tool joint can be
selected for a successful back-off.

Sometimes either stretch or torque freedom disappears over a considerable depth and a decision must be
made where to attempt a back-off. Back-off should not normally be attempted if 15% of the free pipe
signal (stretch or torque) has been lost. There are two reasons for this :

(1)      Either the neutral point will not be at the back-off point, or insufficient torque may be transmitted
to unscrew.

(2)     The reason for gradual disappearance of the pipe signal is probably that the hole is filling up. In
this case, in the time taken to pull the FPI tool out of the hole and replace it with a back-off charge, the
stuck point will almost certainly have moved higher.


3.4.2    Deviated holes

In deviated holes, frictional drag distributed along the pipe body as well as binding at changes in hole
direction cause a reduction in SIT/FPI readings above the true stuck point.

Generally torque can be transmitted deeper than stretch. Furthermore, best torque transmission is usually
obtained at relatively low values of pull (ie below Martin Decker weight before sticking occurred).

Judgement must be exercised in what can be backed off. While a back-off may at times be made with less
than 25% stretch reading, it is generally useless to attempt a back-off without a torque reading of at least
50% free pipe.


4     RUNNING THE BACK-OFF


4.1     General

The back-off operation consists of transmitting left hand torque to the joint to be broken while applying
pull to give neutral weight at this depth. An explosive device (string shot) is positioned by a CCL in the
joint to be broken and is detonated to help unscrew the pipe. Backing-off at a joint where a stand of pipe
has most recently been broken improves the chance of success. The procedures to be followed are
described in Section 4.4 below. All safety precautions for use of explosives (as described in the Explosives
/ Radio Silence document ) must be strictly followed.

Where the FPI is used (rather than the older SIT tool), it may be run in combination with the string shot.
The FPI sensor can then be used to detect the pick-up point (the point at which the tool joint is first in
tension) and also the amount of left hand torque which has been worked down to the joint to be backed off.
These advantages significantly improve the chances of a successful back-off.


4.2     Size of String Shot Charge

The required size of the string shot depends on the depth of the stuck point, the mud gradient, and whether
the back-off is to be performed in pipe or collars. Both Schlumberger and Atlas Wireline provide charts of
recommended shot size based upon these parameters (see Table 1 - Schlumberger, and Table 2- Atlas). The


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 34 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
function of the charge is to shock the tool joint and thus allow the applied torque to unscrew the joint. The
use of excessive charge serves no useful purpose and is likely to cause damage both to the joint and to the
wireline equipment. A correct back-off torque applied on the desired joint is much more important for a
successful operation than an increased explosive load.


4.3     Conditions

Warning :     THE SAFETY PROCEDURES FOR USING EXPLOSIVES IN OFFSHORE
DRILLING / COMPLETION OPERATIONS MUST BE OBSERVED.

(See Explosives / Radio Silence document)

The conditions for a successful back off are :

(1)      String shot strength sufficient to back off pipe without causing damage to pipe or connection
(Schlumberger or Dresser shall advise).

(2)      Correctly calculated weight of string at point of back off. The ideal weight condition at the point
of back off is a neutral condition.  Determination of this condition requires careful calculation however,
and where there is any uncertainty the calculation shall be made so as to leave the break in tension.

       The following information is a necessity for an accurate calculation :

(a)     The weight of the string when it became stuck. (Weight up and down should be documented.)

(b)     Does the string weight include the kelly?

(c)     Does the string weight include the block?

(d)     What was the pump pressure prior to sticking?

(3)      Sufficient reverse (back or left hand) torque.

NOTE : The amount of reverse torque to be applied depends on the pipe used, hole depth and deviations
and so no hard and fast rule can be laid down. As a general guide Table 2, below, states round figure
recommendations.

Table 2 - Back Off Torques
_____________________________________________________________

Drill Pipe Depth (ft)   Turns per 1000ft
_____________________________________________________________

Under 4000          1/4 to 1/2

4000 - 9000         1/2 to 3/4

Over 9000           3/4 to 1
_____________________________________________________________

(4)     Tong and slip dies must be sharp, clean and the correct size to bite and hold the pipe, kelly or
whatever other part of the string protrudes above the rotary table.

(5)    When applying torque with pipe in hand slips, prior to installing tongs, the slips handles shall be
tied with soft line just in case they slip and jump during this operation.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 35 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
(6)    When applying torque the elevators shall be latched around the pipe and free below the tool joint
so that the pipe can rotate freely through the elevators. The hook shall be locked when the pipe is being
rotated in the slips.

(7)       If the pipe is to be lifted out of the slips without tongs engaged and biting, then ensure that there is
no residual torque present to rotate the pipe and so foul up the tong lines.

(8)     The bull plug at the top of the swivel shall be well maintained so that if a string shot has to be run
through the kelly it is not necessary to remove the gooseneck.

(9)       If operational conditions do not allow application of reverse torque it may be necessary to 'jump' a
box using either Schlumberger, Dresser, JRC or Hotforge. When jumping a box, the charge shall be
accurately placed in the box and maximum overpull applied before detonation.


4.4     Procedures


4.4.1   Working torque down hole

It is often necessary to work the reverse torque down the string to the desired back off depth, especially in a
crooked or deviated hole. To accomplish this :

(1)      Set the string at the calculated back off weight.

(2)    Mark the pipe at the top of the slips and refer to this datum mark at all times. (Do not use the
weight indicator hereafter because wall friction may cause an inaccurate reading.)

(3)     Apply half of the reverse torque required for the back off and lock the rotary.

(4)     Use a jerk line and the rotary tongs to pull off the rotary lock and hold.

(5)     Pick up the string off the slips and work the pipe vertically a few times (do not go lower than the
'weight mark' as the pipe may break at random).

(6)      Set the pipe back on the slips at the weight mark and pull tongs to relock the rotary.

(7)       If it is believed that the pipe will accept the remaining torque, then apply it.  If not, then apply half
the remaining torque and keep repeating steps (3) to (6) until the full amount of required reverse torque has
been applied.

NOTE : Using the rotary on the pipe to apply the full reverse torque can damage the pipe and cause the
string to break prematurely.  Therefore, use the rotary to apply the first half of reverse torque and complete
the operation using the rotary tongs.


4.4.2   Completing the back off

After detonation proceed to :

(1)     Check for back off. Usually the pipe has spun free with the box and pin completely unscrewed.
In some cases, however, the pipe may only partially back off and when picking up no indication of back off
will be observed.

(2)     Complete the back off :


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 36 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
(a)     Apply approximately half of the calculated reverse torque to the string and work the pipe up and
down ensuring that the neutral point passes beyond (below) the point where the back off was shot.

(b)       If any torque is lost then repeat (a) until back off is completed.

(c)       If no torque is lost then increase the torque a further increment and prepare for next back off
attempt. (A reassessment of string weight to the back off point is probably called for at this juncture.)

NOTE:
1       After a successful back off, POOH checking all connections for correct make-up torque.

2       Whilst POOH do not rotate pipe and do not circulate unless necessary.

3       Successful back off between DCs is statistically low. The best string joint for back off, therefore,
is at the crossover from DCs to HWDP (if unstuck). This enables fishing assemblies to be jarred directly
on the drill collar string.

4        Prior to applying reverse torque, first torque the string to the right. Check the torque amount on
the Ampere meter. When later applying reverse torque, the reading on the Ampere meter should not
exceed the maximum observed while applying the right-hand torque.

5      See also Drilling Engineers Notebook, Stuck Pipe / Fishing Section



Revision Status


Custodian :    UEOW/1

Issue   Date    Engineer        Authorised       Description of change
/Rev

Original 1987                  Composite of DOM 1, Part 2, Chapter 4, and DOM 5

Am 01  18/05/92 Beltman         Restructured content


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 37 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
SUBSEA BOPS AND MARINE RISERS


MARINE OPERATIONS

Note:   The following procedures were designed for the Semi-Submersible Rig Stadrill when owned and
operated by Shell Expro. Therefore they must be taken as guidelines only. The Contractors own procedures
take preference.


1     SPACING OUT OF MARINE RISERS


1.1      Riser Length Calculation

The correct positioning of the upper end of the marine riser system is of vital importance for reasons of rig
and personnel safety. The marine riser length is determined from the following dimensions:


(1)     Rotary table to datum line (PGB) (At mean sea level or mid-tide, and rig at : L1 storm draught)

(2)    Datum line to top of riser adapter on stack (for stack in use) : L2

(3)     Rotary table to bottom of upper ball joint, or rotary table to bottom of bell nipple : L3

(4)     Length of collapsed telescopic joint : L4

(5)      Full stroke of telescopic joint (half stroke value used in L6 calculation) : L5

The riser length (L6) calculation is:

L6 = L1 - (L2 + L3 + L4 + 1/2 L5).

Round off length L6 to the nearest 5 ft, and from Table 1 determine the riser space-out for the L6 length.

Table 1 - Riser Space Out with 50 ft - 40 ft - 25 ft - 10 ft Riser Lengths
_____________________________________________________

L6                   50 ft           40 ft           25 ft           10 ft
_____________________________________________________

125                   2                     0                     1
       0
130                   1                     2                     0
       0
135                   2                     0                     1
       1
140                   2                     1                     0
       0
145                   2                     0                     1
       2
150                   3                     0                     0
       0


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 38 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
155                   1                     2                     1
       0
160                   3                     0                     0
       1
165                   2                     1                     1
       0
170                   3                     0                     0
       2
175                   3                     0                     1
       0
180                   2                     2                     0
       0
185                   3                     0                     1
       1
190                   3                     1                     0
       0
195                   3                     0                     1
       2
200                   4                     0                     0
       0
205                   2                     2                     1
       0
210                   4                     0                     0
       1
215                   3                     1                     1
       0
220                   4                     0                     0
       2
225                   4                     0                     1
       0

_____________________________________________________


NOTE: For each additional 100 ft add 2 x 50 ft lengths.
___________________________________________________



1.2      Stadrill Dimensions Concerning Marine Risers


Table 2 - Stadrill Values of L2 + L3 + L4 + 1/2 L5

__________________________________________________________________

Item                                      Size                     Size
        Size
__________________________________________________________________

Marine Riser                   24"                    24"
        16"

Stack                                21 1/4"         13 5/8"                13 5/8"

Drilling draft              85ft                       85ft                                85ft


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 39 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
RT to MSL at                      85ft                       85ft                                85ft
drilling draft

L2 Datum Line (PGB)    29ft                       39ft                                39ft
Top of riser
adapter on stack

L3 RT to top of           10ft 6"                    10ft 6"                10 ft 6"
telescopic joint

L4 Length collapsed      65ft 4 3/4"       65ft 4 3/4"                66ft 1/2" telescopic joint

L5 Half stroke            27ft 6"           27ft 6"                    27ft 6"
of telescopic joint

L2 + L3 + L4 + 1/2L5    132ft 4 3/4"      142ft 4 3/4"            143 ft
__________________________________________________________________
     NOTE: All measurements are to face of box.
__________________________________________________________________




1.3     Requirements for Riser Joints on a Given Location

Before the riser is first run, the following joints should be on board: 50 ft joints of total length in excess of
the water depth of the proposed location plus 2 x 40 ft pups, 2 x 25 ft pups and one
10 ft pup



1.4      Positioning of Pup Joints, Buoyancy Modules, etc


(1)     The joint above the BOP stack is usually the 50 ft joint with booster line termination subs. The
next joint up should be the longest possible, allowing for the fact that this double may have to be handled in
the derrick.

(2)     There should be a 50 ft joint immediately below the telescopic joint. An exception occurs when
Stadrill is using the 16 inch marine riser with the 24" telescopic joint and a transition sub (24" x 16"
Cameron RCKC) is required.

(3)      Riser buoyancy modules, when required by Base, will be fitted in between the following limiting
positions:

          (a) 100 ft above the top of the BOP stack.
         (b) 100 ft below the splash zone.

(4)    As far as possible within the constraints mentioned, keep all riser pup joints together for ease of
handling. It is best to place the pup joints with their more frequent connections in the middle of the riser,
this avoids the areas of high stress associated with the splash zone and the ball joint on top of the BOP
stack.

(5)    On dual stack systems often the 20 1/4" stack requires 10 ft more riser than the


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 40 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
        13 5/8" stack. Therefore, whenever possible, include a 10 ft pup in the 20 1/4"
stackconfiguration. This can then be removed when running the 13 5/8" stack, thus minimising riser
handling.


2     GENERAL NOTES ON MARINE RISERS


Warning:      On no account and under no circumstances is any welding to be done on marine risers.


(1)      Risers and BOP stacks should not be landed when the rig motions exceed the following criteria,
which are the over-riding constraints although experience has shown that stack handling:

Riser and upper part of stack:          Max total heave = 3 ft
                                                              Pitch and roll = 1 1/2 deg (half amplitude).

Riser and whole stack:               Max total heave = 5 ft
                                                              Pitch and roll = 1 1/2 deg (half amplitude).

Always raise and lower the stack through the splash zone as quickly as possible. For this reason a 100 ft
stand of riser (2 joints of 50 ft) should be ready made up and stood back in the derrick, for use in getting
through the splash zone without having to stop halfway through. The reverse applies when pulling the
stack; the last two joints should be pulled together in order to get the stack through the splash zone as fast
as possible.

On rigs with BOP guide and bumper frames on the stack and around the spider deck, ballast the rig down
sufficiently so that the bottom of the stack is in the water before the top leaves the bumper frame.

Always land the BOP stack with DSC engaged or rucker tension preset as required, or both.


Note 1: Before rerunning the stack and also before rerunning a riser after a prolonged WOW period, it is
recommended that the TV camera be run in order to check that the subsea connection is clear of any
obstructions.

Note 2: Never raise the BOP stack with the diverter housing running tool, always remove the diverter
housing first and unlatch with the riser running tool installed.


 (2)    Make up torque on actuating bolts should not exceed manufacturer's recommendations. When
using air wrenches, use a regulator in the airline and select the pressure by comparing output torque with an
engine room torque wrench. Paint the recommended air pressure on the regulator.

(3)    Two lip seals are fitted to the box of the riser coupling. The recommended practice is to install the
top seal with the lip facing up, and the lower seal with the lip facing down. The top seal provides a seal
against internal pressure, and when the riser is empty the lower seal provides a seal against external
pressure. This configuration allows the maximum pressure differential across the seals, making the sealing
more effective.

(4)     Use protectors on the riser pin, and on kill/choke/booster lines, when handling the riser on deck
and when pulling it up the pipe ramp.

(5)     Each time the riser is laid down on deck, check each joint for:


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 41 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
          (a)      Free action of dogs and the complete dog actuating mechanism. (Do no
         tighten upactuating bolts of risers without a pin in the box.)
         (b)     Both main seals complete and installed as in item (3) above.
          (c)     Both locking plates in position and free to move.
         (d)      Seals on kill, choke and booster lines satisfactory.
          (e)      Hydraulic hose clamps satisfactory.
           (f)     Damage to pin or box.

Note:   Keep pin, box and dogs adequately greased.


(6)      Riser body, pin and box shall be inspected at regular intervals (ie once on each well) for cracks
and wear (by a reputable inspection company). Special attention shall be paid to the wall thicknesses of the
telescopic joint, and to checking the wear of the first joint above the ball joint.

(7)      Store and rack the riser joints on wooden cradles.

(8)    When running the riser, pressure test the kill and choke lines when the stack is below the splash
zone, after each three further joints have been run and once more just before landing. Fill up the booster
lines - see first Note below.

(9)      Ball joint pressure on pressure-balanced ball joints shall be adjusted as per manufacturers'
recommendations for Riser tension, water depth and mud gradient.

(10)   When a bag type seal is fitted in the telescopic joint, adjust the pressure until mud just bleeds
through to provide lubrication. When the riser is empty, lubricate using a water hose. If the bag type seal
fails, then on some Regan telescopic joints the packer can be energised mechanically to last the well out.

(11)    Ensure that sufficient empty tank space is available to store mud recovered from the riser if it has
to be displaced to water. For example, this would amount to approximately 500 barrels for a 24 inch riser
being used in 1000 ft water depth.

(12)   When running risers and stacks, move the rig away from the hole approximately 40 ft, until the
telescopic joint has been stroked out. Then reposition the rig over the hole again.

(13)    Current practice is to run both hydraulic control pods on a wireline. The hydraulic hose for the
wireline run pods should be clamped to the running wire as follows:

          (a) First clamp 15 ft above the top of the pod.
         (b) Up to 50 ft below the splash zone, 1 clamp every 25 ft.
          (c) From 50 ft below the splash zone, 1 clamp every 10 ft.

(14)    For further instructions on running and maintenance of marine risers, see the manufacturer's
manuals.

Note:   Since most booster line systems are equipped with low pressure centrifugal pumps, difficulty may
be encountered when displacing the riser to sea water via this system because the differential
pressurebetween mud and sea water may be too much for the pumps to handle.

In this case it could be mistakenly assumed that the booster lines are plugged. The same type of problem
could arise when the riser is run in without filling up the booster lines. The differential pressure between air
and sea water, or an airlock, could again make it impossible to circulate using the low pressure system.
Therefore, provision should be made to hook up a rig pump into the system to be able to overcome high
differential pressures if the need arises.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 42 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
A provisional alternative would be to circulate via the kill line, although in general this should be avoided
whenever possible, because the booster line may actually be plugged.

Note:  To reduce the problem of clay particles or cuttings clinging to the inside of the riser, especially
when drilling smaller hole sizes, it isrecommended when pulling the bit out of the hole, that as the bit
reaches 30 ft below the seabed the booster pumps be run at maximum rate on the circulation lines until
120% of riser volume has been displaced before pulling through the riser.

This problem is especially prevalent when 24 inch risers are used in water depths of over 500 ft, and in
such cases the above procedure must be carried out.

The riser tension may have to be increased as the particles, which stick to the inside of the riser, cause a
weight increase. (See the Riser Tension Graphs in the rig's Underwater Equipment Manual.)


3     RISER TENSIONING


3.1      Introduction

The objective is to limit the stresses in the riser to an acceptable level so that failure due to fatigue will not
occur, and to ensure that the angle at the ball joint is within fixed limits.

The following factors increase both stress and ball joint angle:

waves currents vessel motion; surge and sway vessel offset from hole high mud gradient in the riser

The following factors can be used to reduce both stress and ball joint angle:

increasing wireline compensator (WLC)/ruckers tension reducing mud gradient in the riser (flush to water)
maintaining vessel position

Rig offset from the hole can change the ball joint angle considerably.

Minimum ball joint angle occurs when the rig is 2% or 3% into the weather (percentage figures refer to
distance rig is off location expressed as a percentage of water depth), not always when it is precisely above
the hole. The riser stress varies with the vessel position and is also at a minimum with the rig 2% to 3%
into the weather. Although this would call for repositioning the rig under bad weather conditions,
repositioning is not generally practical. As a general rule the rig should not be moved to minimize riser
stresses or ball joint angle.



3.2     Tension to be Applied

The tension to be applied to maintain the required stress in the riser to prevent buckling is dependent on the
following factors:

Water depth, wave height ,weight of contents in riser

By plotting the value of these criteria on the Riser Tension Graphs (provided in the rig's Underwater
Equipment Manual) the minimum tension to be applied to the riser can be determined. Dividing this value
by the number of tensioners in use gives the tension to be applied to each tensioning unit.

To enable the lower ball joint to operate safely under the loads induced by the stress in the riser, Cameron
have limited the bearing stresses to a relatively low value by pressurizing sealed areas in the upper and


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 43 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
lower parts of the ball joint using a lubricant as the pressurising agent. To determine the pressure to be
applied to these areas refer to Para 3.3.

Note:   This does not apply in the case of a flex joint.

Once a riser has been connected, the tension shall be adjusted to take account of varying operating
conditions, such as:


(1) Increase in mud gradient:

Interpolate on the graphs for the new mud gradient, if the difference in tension in less than 10 kips then no
action is necessary. If the difference in tension is more than 10 kips then additional tension is required and
this involves calculating the required air pressure and adjusting the system accordingly.


(2) Deteriorating weather:

When weather conditions are forecast to deteriorate, steps shall be taken to ensure that the riser is tensioned
adequately. Two situations must be considered:

(a) Drilling continues:


(i)     Draw a constant mud gradient line on the tensioning graph for the mud gradient in use.
(ii)    From this line, read off the tension required for the maximum wave height expected.
(iii)     Adjust WLC/rucker air pressure to give this tension.

(b) Drilling is suspended:


(i)     Land off drill string.
(ii)     Flush riser to water.
(iii)    Read off the tension for maximum expected wave height on the 450 pptf line (sea water).
(iv)     Adjust the WLC/rucker air pressure give this tension.

Note 1:  If there is ample tension in the riser for the maximum expected wave, it is advisable not to reduce
tension. When operations restart and heavy mud is again used, no change will be necessary.

Note 2: Sometimes operations will continue for some time before the riser can be flushed to sea water. In
this case it is necessary to check that the tension is adequate for the expected wave height until the mud
weight can be reduced.  If this tension is more than 10 kips over that already applied, then the WLC/rucker
air pressure should be increased accordingly, as in (a) above.

Note 3: See also Heavy Weather Policy.


(3) Vessel offset:

The vessel offset has an influence on riser stress and ball joint angle. The ball joint angle and guide line
angle should be monitored regularly to determine the vessel offset. The mean offset as determined above
should be less than 5% of the water depth (say 3 degrees) at all times.


(4) Ball joint angle:


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 44 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
Damage will occur if the ball joint is swivelled through more than 9 degrees from vertical. Preventive
action must be initiated before this angle is reached.

The following courses of action minimize or avoid ball joint damage:


(a)      Increased WLC/rucker tension.
(b)      Riser flushed to sea water (reduces mud gradient).
(c)      Riser disconnected.



3.3      Instructions for Determining Lubrication Pressure of 21 1/4 Inch Limited Bearing Type Ball Joint


(1)    From Fig 1, read net upward force on ball joint for the respective mud gradient and sea water
depth.

(2)    Add to above value the anticipated tension on ball joint as determined by the riser tensioning
programme.

(3)    From Fig 2, select minimum lubrication pressure that will produce a downward force equivalent to
value obtained from (2) above.

(4)    From Table 3 select the hydrostatic pressure for the appropriate water depth and deduct this figure
from the value obtained in (3) above.

(5)     Apply, at the surface, the pressure value obtained at step (4) to the ball joint lubrication system.

 Table 3 - Hydrostatic Pressure/Water Depth

__________________________________________

Depth (ft)                                          Pressure (psi)
__________________________________________

100                                               38
200                                               76
300                                               114
400                                               151
500                                               189
600                                               227
700                                               265
800                                               303
900                                               341
1000                                              378
_________________________________________



4      SLIPPING OR CUTTING OF RISER TENSIONER WIRELINES


4.1      Introduction


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 45 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
The riser tensioner lines have a limited life and have to be moved through the system and cut off in a
similar fashion as is done for the block line.

Since it is a complicated task to calculate the amount of work done by the line expressed in ton-miles, a
system has been adopted where the work done is expressed in ton-cycles

For practical purposed the ton-cycles are calculated every 6-hours using the average heave period and
average line tension during this period. When all 6-hourly ton-cycles are added up, and have reached a
certain sum total, then the entire length of line reeved in the system (including the dead-line part) will have
to be slipped through and cut off.

According to the latest offshore practice and experience, the sum total for cutting is 7 million ton-cycles for
a 1 3/4 inch diameter line, providing it is of a recommended type such as:

Right Hand Lang Lay, IWRC, and either 6 x 36, 6 x 37, 6 x 41 or 6 x 49, all IPS.

For different diameter lines, an estimate of line life can be taken as proportional to the square of the
diameter ratios.

The 1 3/4" lines are commonly used with 80,000 lb capacity tensioners, and 1 1/2" lines with 60,000 lb
capacity tensioners, giving a minimum safety factor of approximately 3 for the line.


4.2     Determining the Cycles

If the rig is equipped with a heave recorder system, either chart or counter, then the average number of
heave movements per 6 hour period can be easily determined. Otherwise, the cycles can be determined by
means of a stop watch, timing the heave period say be done by the Watchstander.



4.3     Determining the Line Tension

The maximum tension occurs in the fast line part of the system (attached to the marine riser), and is
calculated by multiplying the tensioner air pressure by the piston area, divided by the number of lines
reeved. Divide then by 2000 to convert pounds into tons (short) and also divide by the cosine of the fast
line fleet angle (the larger the angle, the greater the tension).

Example:

00.00 - 06.00 hr:        Average heave period times = 11 seconds
06.00 - 12.00 hr:        Average heave period times = 10 seconds
12.00 - 18.00 hr:        Average heave period times = 9 seconds
18.00 - 24.00 hr:        Average heave period times = 7 seconds

Fleet angle is 15 degrees
Tensioner air pressure = 1300 psi (assume this to have been the same
                                                         throughout the day)
Piston diameter = 14"
Number of lines reeved = 4

Calculating cycles for the day:

(60 x 60 x 6)/11 + (60 x 60 x 6)/10 + (60 x 60 x 6)/9 + (60 x 60 x 6)/7

= 9610 cycles


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 46 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
Calculating the line tension:

(pi/4 x 14 x 14 x 1300)/cos 15deg x 4 = 51815 lbs
                                                                       =
5185/2000 = 26 tons

Calculating the ton-cycles:

Total ton-cycles for the day are: 26 x 9610 = 249,860 ton-cycles

Assuming that the life of the line was estimated at 7 million ton-cycles, and also assuming that the above
conditions prevail as an average for a very prolonged period of time, then the line should be cut after a
cumulative:

7 000 000 /249 860 = 28 days actual operating time.


Note 1: No ton-cycles are accumulated during periods of flat calm seas when the rig does not heave, nor
when a tensioner is not attached to a marine riser.


Note 2: Regardless of the slipping programme adopted, the lines should be visually inspected and gauged
at regular intervals, and any damage or excessive wear noticed must override the normal cutting
programme.


Note 3: Lines shall be prematurely slipped/cut, before a production test and before a forecasted prelonged
period of bad weather if they are almost due for cutting according to the programme.


Note 4: For an example of a Ton-Cycle Record Chart see Fig.3


5     STADRILL RISER COMPONENTS


5.1     16" Riser

 Table 4 - Stadrill 16 Inch Riser Components
_______________________________________________________________________

Item            Quantity         Description                        Part No.
_______________________________________________________________________

1                     12                    50 ft riser joints          694131-01-00-00

2                     4                     40 ft riser joints          694131-02-00-00

3                     3                     25 ft riser joints          694131-03-00-00

4                     3                     10 ft riser joints          694131-04-00-00

5                     2                     5 ft termination sub              695914-01-00-00
                                                                                      (1 spare)
6                     3                         Riser handling tools              691061-04-01-02


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 47 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
7                     1                        Telescopic joint                 694240-05-00-00
_______________________________________________________________________

1                     12                    50 ft riser joints          694131-01-00-00

2                     4                     40 ft riser joints          694131-02-00-00

3                     3                     25 ft riser joints          694131-03-00-00

4                     3                     10 ft riser joints          694131-04-00-00

5                     2                     5 ft termination sub              695914-01-00-00
                                                                                      (1 spare)
6                     3                         Riser handling tools              691061-04-01-02

7                     1                        Telescopic joint                 694240-05-00-00
_______________________________________________________________________

NOTE: Riser is fabricated from 16" x 5/8" wall
                   thickness, X-52 pipe.

NOTE: Choke, kill and circulating lines are 3 1/2" OD x
                      2 1/2" ID AISI 4130 pipe.

________________________________________________


5.2     24" Riser

Table 5 - Stadrill 24 Inch Riser Components
_______________________________________________________________________

Item            Quantity         Description                                          Part No.
_______________________________________________________________________
1                            1                Diveter housing,        Regan KFDS with 24 inch

       Cameron R conn.

2                            1                Diverter assembly

3                            1               Telescopic joint                 694240-06-00-00

4                            3                Riser handling tools              691061-03-01-02

5                            1                Riser spider                            695363-
01-00-00

6                            12            50 ft riser joints          694132-01-00-00

7                            4             40 ft riser joints          694132-02-00-00

8                            3             25 ft riser joints          694132-03-00-00

9                            3             10 ft riser joints          694132-04-00-00


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 48 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
10                           2             5 ft termination sub (1 spare)

11                           1               Adapter, 24" type 'R' pin 688912-07-00-00
                                              bottom x flanged top, for
                                         Cameron diverter support ball

12                    1                    Cameron ball joint

13                    1                    Flow line spool, c/w pressure
                                                   energised seals

14                    1                         Diverter handling tools

15                    1                         Diverter control panel

16                    2                      Adapter spool pup, 24" RCK 695901-01-00-00
                                           box x 16 inch RCK pin,
                                           5 ft long (1 spare)
__________________________________________________________________

NOTE: Riser is fabricated from 242 x 5/8" wall
                           thickness, X-52 pipe.

NOTE: Choke, kill and circulating lines are 3 1/2" OD x
                      2 1/2" ID AISI 4130 pipe.


__________________________________________________________________


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 49 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
SUBSEA BOP PROCEDURES


Note:   The following procedures were designed for safe operation of the Semi-Submersible Rig Stadrill
(When Owned And Operated By ShellExpro). Therefore they must be treated as Guidelines and do not
take preference over the Contractor's Procedures designed for the Contractor's Equipment.
1     LANDING OF UNDERWATER STACKS

Stacks can be landed as follows :

(1)     Using the heave compensator only :

        This system can only be used if the weight of stack and marine riser does not exceed the rated
capacity of the heave compensator. This means that it cannot be used for the single stack system at all, and
only to 750 ft water depth for the two stack system.

(2)     Using the heave compensator and the WLC/ruckers :

        This system is suitable for both single and two stack systems. It is the recommended method for
the two stack system once the water depth exceeds 750 ft and for the single stack system at all times.

(3)     Using the travelling block (no heave compensator) and the WLC/ruckers :

        This system is applicable to both single and two stack systems, but (2) is preferred.

In all the above cases it is assumed that the inner barrel of the telescopic joint is stroked out. A variation
with the single stack system is to land the stack using the heave compensator and the WLC/ruckers with the
telescopic joint collapsed. This is done if there is any doubt about the stops on the inner barrel being
capable of carrying the complete weight of stack and riser.

The rig must be moved away 30 to 50 ft from the wellhead when the stack is pulled or run.

The guide line tensioners must be fully extended, with just enough pressure applied to take up the weight of
the lines.

For accurate control, observe the retraction of the tensioner piston rod and keep it within the set limits using
the air winches.

When the stack has been moved over the wellhead prior to landing (during stroking out of the telescopic
joint), increase the guide line tension to 5000 lb.

When the stack is landed, the guide line tension applied is approximately 2000 lb higher than the weight of
the line.

Note 1: During the running of the stack, adhere to the instructions laid down in this procedure, and
pressure test the choke and kill lines.

Note 2: Generally the rig shall be ballasted to a draught that allows the stack to be in the splash zone while
the upper part of the guidance system still keeps the stack from moving excessively, provided weather
conditions and deck load permit.

Note 3: Maximum weather conditions under which a stack can still be run are: 18 ft waves, 1 1/2 degrees
pitch and roll (half amplitude), and 3 ft heave.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 50 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
Note 4: Never lower or land the stack by blowing off excess pressure from the WLC/ruckers, as there is no
weight control.

Note 5: Use rig TV or RCV for observation when landing the stack. Only land 'blind' in extreme
emergencies.

Note 6: Move the rig back over the hole at the time when the telescopic joint is being stroked out.

Note 7: When starting to run the stack, make up a double marine riser joint (two joints of 50 ft each), then
connect it to the ball joint. This allows a rapid descent of the stack through the splash zone. When pulling
the stack the same applies, and the double joint can be set back in the derrick and laid down later if
necessary, after the stack is out of the water.


2    LAND STACK USING THE HEAVE COMPENSATOR ONLY


(1)    Run the two stack system and riser in the normal manner (see Chapter 8), until the telescopic joint
is added. Recordindicator. Land back in the spider.

(2)      Stroke out the inner barrel of the telescopic joint. Check the weight on the Martin Decker weight
indicator. Open the lock bar of the DSC. When the telescopic joint is fully stroked out, the block will
continue to travel 25 ft before the full weight of stack and riser is supported by the DSC.

(3)      Set the DSC hook load gauge to the total string weight (see example calculation following). Run
and land the TV on the stack guide posts, and lower the camera to below the stack.

NOTE: Example of calculation of total string weight:

Assume gross total weight is             390 000 lb
Block weight + main frame              55 000
Difference                                   335 000
Land stack with 15 000 lb weight  15 000
Total string weight                            320 000 lb

      When calculating the DSC weight, subtract only the weight of the travelling block and the main
frame (55 000 lb). The lower DSC frame (hook frame, BJ hook, bails and elevator) are part of the total
string weight.

(4)    Move the rig over the wellhead, and calibrate the Honeywell position instrumentation.

(5)     Lower stack until the WLC/rucker clamps are at a convenient height for attaching the WLC/rucker
wires and choke and kill goosenecks. All WLC/ruckers to be in the fully        extended position.

(6)     Lower stack and riser, and land under TV observation. Touch down weight is 15 000 lb in the
above example.

(7)     Lock the wellhead connector.  Check under TV observation that the wellhead connector is locked
by observing the indicator on the connector and by increasing the DSC setting to approximately 40 000 lb
over the initial setting and pressuring up against the blind rams and casing.

Note:   Only a nominal pressure is required do not overpressure casing eg. 250 psi on an 18 3/4 BOP will
give 69,000 lbs overpull on the connector and is adequate to check for leaks at the connector

(8)    When satisfied that the wellhead connector is locked, blow down the heave compensator until the
required operating tension of the WLC/ruckers (see Marine Riser Tension Graphs in the rig's Underwater


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 51 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
Equipment Manual) +/- 30 000 lb is reached on the hook load gauge, and allow the DSC to compensate in
mid-stroke.

(9)      Pressurize the WLC/ruckers to operating tension. During this process blow down the heave
compensator to allow the WLC/ruckers to take over in pairs. Once operating tension has been reached,
blow down the heave compensator completely and lock it.

(10)    Lower the inner barrel of the telescopic joint, install the diverter and upper ball joint assembly and
latch them into the diverter housing.

Note:   See Para 5 for landing stack with telescopic joint collapsed and locked.


3    LAND STACK USING THE HEAVE COMPENSATOR AND THE WLC/RUCKERS


(1)    Run the stack and riser in the normal manner (see Chapter 8), until the telescopic joint is added.
Record the weight of stack and riser shown on the Martin Decker weight indicator. Land back in spider.

(2)      Stroke out the inner barrel of the telescopic joint. Check the weight on the MD weight indicator.
Open the lock bar of the DSC. When the telescopic joint is fully stroked out, the block will continue to
travel 25 ft before the full weight of stack and riser is supported by the DSC.

(3)      Set the DSC hook load gauge to the total string weight (see example calculation following). Run
and land the TV on the stack guide posts, and lower the camera to below the stack.

NOTE: Example calculation of total string weight:

Assumed gross total weight                            390 000 lb
WLC/rucker operating tension required    150 000
Difference                                                 240 000
Land stack with 15 000 lb weight                15 000
                                                                 225 000
Block weight + main frame                            55 000
Total string weight                                          170 000 lb

      When calculating the DSC weight, subtract only the weight of the travelling block and the main
frame (55 000 lb). The lower DSC frame (hook frame, BJ hook, bails and elevator) are part of the total
string weight.

(4)    Move the rig over the wellhead, and calibrate the Honeywell position instrumentation .

(5)     Lower stack and riser until at a convenient height for attaching the WLC/rucker wires and
        choke and kill goosenecks. All WLC/ruckers to be in the fully extended position.

(6)     Lower stack and riser until the WLC/rucker wires are taut, then pressurize the WLC/ruckers to the
operating tension. A decrease in weight, equal to the amount of riser tension applied, should be noted on
the weight indicator, ie 390 000 - 150 000 = 240 000 lb in above example.

(7)     Lower the stack and riser, and land under TV observation. Touch down weight is 15 000 lb.
Continue to lower the block until the DSC is in mid-stroke, and allow the DSC to compensate.

(8)     Lock the wellhead connector.  Check under TV observation that the wellhead connector is locked
by observing the indicator on the connector and by increasing the DSC setting to approximately 40 000 lb
over the initial setting and pressure up against the blind rams and casing.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 52 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
Note:   Only a nominal pressure is required do not overpressure casing eg. 250 psi on an 18 3/4 BOP will
give 69,000 lbs overpull on the connector and is adequate to check for leaks at the connector

(9)    When satisfied that the wellhead connector is locked, blow down the heave compensator and
allow the WLC/ruckers to take over. Once the WLC/ruckers have taken over fully, blow down the heave
compensator completely and lock it.

(10)    Lower the inner barrel of the telescopic joint, and install and lock the diverter housing and upper
ball joint assembly.


Note:   See Para 5 for landing stack with telescopic joint collapsed and locked.


4    LAND STACK USING THE TRAVELLING BLOCK (NO HEAVE COMPENSATOR) AND
THE WLC/RUCKERS


(1)    Run the stack and the riser in the normal manner , until the telescopic joint is added.

(2)      Stroke out the inner barrel of the telescopic joint, pick up the complete stack and riser and record
the weight shown on the Martin Decker weight indicator.

(3)    Run and land the TV on the stack guide posts, and lower the camera to below the stack.
 (4)    Move the rig over the wellhead, and calibrate the Honeywell position instrumentation

(5)     Lower stack and riser until at a convenient height for attaching the WLC/rucker wires and choke
and kill goosenecks. All WLC/ruckers to be in the fully extended position.

(6)     Lower stack and riser until the WLC/rucker wires are taut, then pressurize the WLC/ruckers to the
operating tension. A decrease in weight, equal to the amount of riser tension applied, should be noted on
the weight indicator.

(7)     Lower stack and riser, and land under TV observation. Lower the inner barrel of the telescopic
joint sufficiently to have no interference from the rig heave.

(8)     Lock the wellhead connector.

         Pull 40 000 lb overpull, and observe the indicator on the connection, to check that the wellhead
connector is locked, if weather and heave conditions permit,and pressure up against the blind rams and
casing under TV observation.

Note:   Only a nominal pressure is required do not overpressure casing eg. 250 psi on an 18 3/4 BOP will
give 69,000 lbs overpull on the connector and is adequate to check for leaks at the connector

(9)    When wellhead connector is locked collapse the inner barrel of the telescopic joint to the required
position, and install and lock the diverter housing and upper ball joint assembly.


5    LAND STACK WITH THE TELESCOPIC JOINT COLLAPSED AND LOCKED

(1)    Run stack, riser and telescopic joint in the conventional manner, until the box of the telescopic
joint is landed on the spider.

(2)     Stab one extra joint of marine riser (landing joint) into the telescopic joint box, and make up.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 53 از 53 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
(3)    Run in the telescopic joint and connect the WLC/rucker wires. Pressurize th WLC/ruckers until
the required operating tension is reached.

(4)      Pressurize the heave compensator to a tension greater than the remaining hook load. Retract the
lock pin of the heave compensator and bleed off pressure until 10 000 lb below the previous hook load
setting.

(5)     Land stack under TV observation and lock the wellhead connector.

(6)      Pressurize the heave compensator and check that the wellhead connector is locked by applying 40
000 lb overpull, and check by pressuring up against the blind rams and casing under TV observation.

Note:   Only a nominal pressure is required do not overpressure casing eg. 250 psi on an 18 3/4 BOP will
give 69,000 lbs overpull on the connector and is adequate to check for leaks at the connector.

(7)     Bleed off the heave compensator pressure until the hook load is equal to the weight of the top joint
(landing joint) of the riser.

(8)     Unlock and stroke out the inner barrel of the telescopic joint.

(9)     Break out the landing joint of the riser, and install and lock the diverter housing plus upperball
joint assembly.

Note:   The above method shall also be used to land the Christmas tree and completion riser of subsea
completions, except that there is no telescopic joint and as such the completion riser will be riding freely
through the spider beams while being kept in tension by the WLC/ruckers.


