

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 2 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
HES Cementing Plug System

Liner Wiper Plugs and Pump Down Plugs

     he HES two plug cementing system is a field
     proven system for cementing liners and consists of
     a liner hanger Setting Ball, Liner Wiper Plug andTPump Down Plug.

The Liner Wiper Plug is connected to the bottom of the
Liner Hanger Running Tool and incorporates a setting
ring and ported nose. The Setting Ball and Liner Wiper
Plug are placed in the cementing manifold at surface
ready for launching.

When the liner has been run to required depth, the
Setting Ball is launched. It may be necessary to circulate
the ball down to the Liner Hanger Running Tool in                PUMP DOWN PLUG
deviated wells.

When the ball seats in the setting ring pressure is applied
from surface to set the Liner Hanger. Additional pressure
is applied to extrude the ball through the setting ring. This
opens a circulation path to allow cement to be circulated
through the Liner Wiper Plug. When the required volume
of cement has been pumped, the Pump Down Plug is
launched. The Pump Down Plug has flexible rubber fins
which wipe the cement from the inside of the drill pipe.

When it reaches the Liner Hanger Running Tool the
Pump Down Plug latches into the Liner Wiper Plug. An
increase in pump pressure shears the Liner Wiper Plug
from the retainer holding it to the Liner Hanger Running
Tool and the two plugs are pumped down the liner as a
single unit. The Liner Wiper plug has flexible rubber fins
which wipe the cement from the inside of the liner.

If required a Latch Down Collar may be placed at the
bottom of the liner, just above the Float Collar. The Liner
Wiper Plug latches and seals off in the Latch Down
Collar. This provides a back up to the check valves in the
Float Shoe and Float Collar to prevent the pumped
cement from back flow into the liner.





                                                         LINER WIPER PLUG




Well Completions


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 2 از 2 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
Applications:                                              Features:

The Plug system is used for setting Liner Hangers and           •  Field proven system
cementing Liners.
                                                                •  Five wiper LWP fins

                                                                •  Plug body sized for liner and drill pipe

                                                                •  Aluminum components used in both plugs



                                                              Benefits:

                                                                •  Reliable system

                                                                •  Efficient wiping of drill pipe & liner

                                                                •  Easy drill out if required





 10/03                            Sales of Halliburton products and services will be
 © 2003 Halliburton                     in accord solely with the terms and conditions
  All Rights Reserved                contained in the contract between Halliburton and
                                     the customer that is applicable to the sale.


