

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 2 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
HES HLH Liner Hanger

                                                 SCOOP HEAD
931oo Liner Hangers

     he HES HLH Liner Hanger is a hydraulic set,
      simple but rugged construction Liner Hanger which
     may be used to hang off cemented liners, nonTcemented liners, slotted liners and sand screens.

The Liner Hanger provides a means of hanging off a liner
placed through the pay zones from the bottom of the
parent casing string. The liner, complete with float shoe
and float collar if appropriate, is run in hole and hung off
in the rotary. The Liner Hanger and Liner Hanger
Running Tool are connected to the liner and run to
required depth on drill pipe. After pick up and slack off
weights are checked, a setting ball is dropped which
seats in a setting ring in the Liner Hanger Running Tool.
Pressure is applied to the drill pipe at surface to set the
                                                    UPPER PBRLiner Hanger. When the Liner Hanger slips are set in
the casing the weight of the liner is transferred from the
drill pipe to the casing and a weight loss will be seen on
the weight indicator at surface. Additional pressure will
shear the setting ball through the setting ring to allow
circulation of cement or other fluids with the Liner Hanger
in the set position. A two plug (Liner Wiper Plug and
Pump Down Plug) system is used to wipe cement from
the drill pipe and liner. The plugs may be latched into a
Latch Down Collar connected immediately above the
Float Collar at the bottom of the liner in order to provide a
back-up to the Float Shoe and Float Collar valves,
preventing back flow of cement into the liner.

The drill pipe and Liner Hanger Running Tool may be
disconnected from the Liner Hanger by slack off and RH
rotation, or by RH torque and RH rotation with the Liner
Hanger in the set position. Approximately twelve turns
are required at the Liner Hanger. The setting ball is
retrieved with the Liner Hanger Running Tool.

The HLH Liner Hanger may be adapted to run either with
an upper PBR/Tie Back Sleeve for monobore
applications or with a Lower PBR, or with both upper and
lower PBR’s. A Scoop Head should be fitted to the top of
the Liner Hanger if an upper PBR is not used.





                                                   HLH LINER HANGER


Well Completions


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 2 از 2 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
Applications:                                              Features:

Allows downhole suspension of liners, slotted liners and          •  Rugged one piece mandrel construction
sand screens in straight and deviated wells.
                                                                •  Full liner ID
                                                                •  Redundant seals in piston chamber
                                                                •  Running Tool pinned to Liner Hanger
                                                                • RH rotation running tool release
                                                                •  Available in standard or CRA materials


                                                              Benefits:

                                                                •  Simple design

                                                                •  Minimum leak paths
                                                                •  Full bore access to liner
                                                                • RH rotation when running liner
                                                                •  Suitable for deviated wells
                                                                •  Suitable for various well conditions
                                                                •  Adaptable for various PBR systems





 10/03                            Sales of Halliburton products and services will be
 © 2003 Halliburton                     in accord solely with the terms and conditions
 All Rights Reserved                contained in the contract between Halliburton and
                                    the customer that is applicable to the sale.


