

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 2 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
HES HLH Running Tool

931oo HLH Running Tool

     he HES Hydraulic Liner Hanger Running Tool is
     used to run and set HLH Liner hangers. It is a
     simple design based on the field proven HES RLTseries Ratch-Latch.

For cemented liners a Liner Wiper Plug is connected to
the bottom of the HLH Running Tool which is then
stabbed into the HLH Liner Hanger. For non cemented
liners an inner wash string may be connected to the
bottom of the Running Tool.

If a Lower PBR is used with the Liner Hanger it may be
necessary to fit an extension to the HLH Running Tool to
position the Liner Wiper Plug below the PBR when the
Running Tool is connected to the Liner Hanger.

The Running Tool may be pinned to the Liner Hanger to
prevent accidental disconnection when running in hole
and to allow RH rotation when running in hole if required.
The number and shear value of the pins is variable.
The Running Tool has a drill pipe thread up and a drill
pipe handling sub should be connected prior to shipment
to the rig site. The handling sub should be at least three
feet longer than the upper PBR or Liner Hanger Scoop
Head if an upper PBR is not used.

When the liner has been run to the required depth, a
setting ball is dropped which seats in a setting ring below
the Running Tool. Pressure is applied at surface to set
the Liner Hanger. Additional pressure will shear the                                                 RUNNING TOOL
setting ball through the setting ring to allow circulation of
cement or other fluids.

The HLH Running Tool may be disconnected from the
Liner Hanger by slack off and RH rotation or by RH
torque and RH rotation with the Liner Hanger in the set
position. Approximately twelve turns are required at the
Liner Hanger. The setting ball is recovered with the
Running Tool.





Well Completions                               RUNNING TOOL EXTENSION


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 2 از 2 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
Applications:                                              Features:

The HLH Running Tool is used to run and set                    •  Rugged one piece mandrel design
HLH Liner Hangers. RH torque up to the value
to shear the pins may be applied when running                  •  Field proven Ratch Latch connection
in hole.
                                                                •  Easily adapted for different applications

                                                                •  Minimal number of component parts

                                                                •  Liner setting ball shear out within housing
                                                            connected to Running Tool


                                                              Benefits:

                                                                •  Easily redressed in the field

                                                                •  Can be used with inner wash string

                                                     •  Avoids pressure surges to formation





 10/03                            Sales of Halliburton products and services will be
 © 2003 Halliburton                     in accord solely with the terms and conditions
  All Rights Reserved                contained in the contract between Halliburton and
                                     the customer that is applicable to the sale.


