

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 3 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
            IASSDU

    Drilling without riser encounter shallow gas procedures

A. PREPARATION AND SAFETY REQUIREMENT

    1.  Hold safety meeting for all crew; assess the high risks and declare the
       procedures in the event that shallow gas is encountered. Specify the
         responsibility for all personnel on board.
    2.  Check flammable gas detectors and rig alarm system.
    3.  Check the lifeboats and emergency generators to ensure they are
        working normally.
    4.  Hold an abandon rig drill, the standby boat will participate the drill
    5.  The unnecessary persons will be reduced to boat.
    6.  Check the fire system around the cellar deck and spray system at
        windlass.
    7.   Strictly carry out hot work permit regulations.
    8.  Shut down the watertight doors and hatch covers.
    9.  Ensure the top drive, tongs, hydraulic catheads and manual elevators
        are working properly in case of emergency releasing drilling tubular.
    10. Ensure that the mud pumps and mud lines are working normally and
       mix two times the whole well volume with 1.3SG kill mud at any time.
    11. The pit fill with kill mud or hi-density mud besides the other pits full of
        seawater.
    12. Power on windlass to be ready to leave well location by windlass.
    13. Both deck cranes must  prepare  personal  baskets  for  possible
        evacuation.
    14. While drilling the hole, barge master and electricians standby at the
         certain anchor up wind. Take off the brake of anchor.
    15. Observe sea current, weather condition and wind direction, the way
           will be moved by the rig.
    16. The tug boat must standby at top wind and top current location when
          is drilling. Monitor current and report to barge master per half hour.
    17. The enough radios must be ready for communication.
    18. The offshore helicopter should be standby at base at any time.
    19. Both the tugboats must be standby to assist the rig.
    20. The drilling will be conducted at daytime.

B.  DRILLING FORMALITY

   1.  Make up drilling string assembly.
     ﹡Use the taper float valve; don’t use the ligulate float valve.
    2.  RIH to seabed and tag water depth.
    3.  Take survey, if less 1 degree and start drilling, if not, wait on weather.
    4.  Run ROV  to seabed beside the wellhead  for observes; subsea
        engineers are designated to observe the moon pool and sea around

                                                                                           1


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 2 از 3 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
        the rig if any air bubbles are coming up or not. Captain, chief engineer
       and electrician must stay in the certain windlass cabin and prepare for
       moving the rig.
    5.  Prevent for the bit over the wellhead when M/U the second joint after
           drilling, so M/U before drilling and rushing to seabed 1 – 4m.
    6.  Use seawater to drilling ahead, and pumping high viscous mud after
        every stand drilled.
    7.  Hold rate of penetration at +/- 25m/hrs.
    8.    If any status like flowing, stop drilling and circulate to observe for 5 to
       10 minutes:
        1) When running in the dubiety shallow gas 1.5m;
        2) Rotate faster going up @ 1.5m
        3) When drilling at sandstone
        4) If see the air bubbles when M/U the DP.
    9.  Survey prior to circulate cleanly, fill hole with hi-vis mud necessarily (if
       so much sand in hole bottom).
    10.  Drill to 8-1/2” pilot hole bottom with seawater, sweep hole clean with
          hi-vis. POOH prior to displace 1.5 times the whole well volume with
          hi-vis mud.
    11. Logging if necessary or according to design, to estimate possibility of
        shallow gas.

C  ENCOUNTER SHALLOW GAS PROCEDURES

        During drilling or observe,  if discover shallow gas, stop drilling, but
    circulation and observe, as early as possible to keep pressure balance.
   Company man, OIM and  relative personnel  estimate  well  condition
    immediately, according to result, procedure is following meanwhile report
    the condition to the base.
     1.   If emit air bubble or mini air current on the sea surface, POOH one
         single joint and stop pump to observe; recover drilling if no bubble.
     2.   If increase air bubble or air current, circulate the hi-density mud and
       observe the change, otherwise drill ahead.
     3.   If continue to increase air bubble, sound the alarm, use max pump
        rates with 1.3SG mud to kill air current. If have no high density kill mud,
      pump mud and sea  water. Report  to company man and OIM
        immediately. Observe the air current situation, if no air current come
        up, recover drilling.
     4.   If appear big air current, and move to sea surface, endanger rig and
        personal safety:
         (1) POOH one stand of drill pipe, stop rotating and set slip, loosen the
           pipe connection above the rotary table meanwhile lock the  drill
             string compensator.
         (2) Rotate counterclockwise the top  drive  with highest speed  to
           release freely the drill string as soon as possible.
         (3) If can not to release the drill string by top drive, set the string on
          manual drill pipe elevator, break out the upper drill pipe joint and
           rack back in derrick, use the air hoist and hydraulic catheads to


                                                                                           2


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 3 از 3 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           unlatch the elevator to release the lower drill strings.

D   RELEASE ANCHOR CHAIN EMERGENCY PROCEDURE

     1. Open spray system of windlass, prevent from spark while releasing
       anchor chain.
     2.  More slack off the anchors chain on back wind and back current.
     3.  Pull the opposite direction anchors chain, move the  rig towards
        forward wind and forward current to left location; meanwhile release
        the side anchors chain, keep from rig inclination, and according to
         condition, ballast properly.
     4.  Fix every anchor chain properly.





                                                                                           3


