

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 3 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                                                                                      Revision 00                                    OPERATIONS MANUAL                                                                            Date 11-Feb-2015



                                                                      This document is the property of Viking Completion Technology FZCo.
        Prepared by Colin Boyle                 (VCT) and is confidential.form withoutIt maythe permissionnot be copiedof VCT.or reproduced in any     Page 1 of 3


                                           Rig Site Q. O. P.
                                              7” x 9.625”
                       CRA Snap In Snap Out Production Seal Unit
                                          Assembly


                            Rig Site Preparation (Prior to Running)


     1. Using the Sub-Assembly Data Packs and the equipment manifest, check that all the necessary seal
       assembly equipment is on location and is in good condition.

     2. Take all relevant measurements of the equipment - lengths, OD's, ID's, etc. Record all relevant
        information into Sub Assembly Data Packs. Verify that 10 off M10 x 16mm brass shear screws have
       been installed above the anchor latch to ensure anchor will be activated at the correct set down
        weight of ± 30,000 lbs.

NOTE: Of particular importance is the length from the anchor latch to the snap collet, and from the snap
         collet to the first seal. This information is critical for proper space out.


                                  Running Procedure


    1.  Make up the snap in snap out anchor latch seal assembly to the bottom of the production tubing and
        run to depth.

NOTE: At this stage the SCSSV does not have to be made up in the string. Should the client require
            it, it should be held open with control line operating pressure during the stabbing operation.

    2.  Run in hole to ±20 ft above the top of the liner and install circulating sub on top of tubing string.

    3.  Reciprocate the string slowly and record the free up and down weights. Record the distance
       between up and down weights.

    4.  With drill pipe full begin circulating at 1 bbl/min with minimum pressure.

    5.  Very slowly, lower the string into the seal bore.

    6.  Watch pressure gauge for pressure increase. When pressure increase is observed stop circulation
       and monitor pressure and returns for 5 min, bleed off & leave valve open. As soon as an indication is
       seen on the weight indicator, mark the pipe (this should be first seal entering the seal bore) and
       measure theoretically to snap collet (This should be approximately 3.0 m.  If pressure bleeds off,
        slack off additional weight until a 2-300 psi pressure is maintained.

    7.  Enter the seal assembly fully into the upper seal bore until the weight loss is observed at the collet
         indicator.





             IETC / VIKING : Bldg. No.6, Ghavampour St., N. Sheikh Bahaee Av. , Post Code: 1995763593 Tehran


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 2 از 3 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                                                                                      Revision 00                                    OPERATIONS MANUAL                                                                           Date 11-Feb-2015



                                                                      This document is the property of Viking Completion Technology FZCo.
        Prepared by Colin Boyle                 (VCT) and is confidential.form withoutIt maythe permissionnot be copiedof VCT.or reproduced in any     Page 2 of 3


                                           Rig Site Q. O. P.
                                              7” x 9.625”
                       CRA Snap In Snap Out Production Seal Unit
                                          Assembly

    8.  Slack off 5-10,000 lb on the collet indicator to verify it is engaged. ( Do not snap through the collet
         indicator) Mark the tubing at the rotary table.

    9.  Pick up 10,000 lb overpull to verify that collet indicator is engaged. Increase pick up to +/-30,000 lb
         to snap collet indicator out of setting sleeve recess.

NOTE: The snap collet should give a +/- 25-30,000 lb positive indication both up and down. This can
      be done as many times as necessary if confirmation is required, but the more times it is done,
       the value will decrease each time.

    10. Slack off to re-engage the collet indicator within the profile in the setting sleeve and repeat steps 6
      and 7.

    11. Perform a pressure test to 1,000 psi for 5 minutes to confirm pressure integrity of seal assembly.

    12. Perform the space out as required from this point and add the calculated expansion travel length
       provided by the office in metres to ensure that when the tubing hanger is landed the shear ring is the
        desired distance above the top of the setting sleeve. This  will ensure that the string is not in
       compression during the landing of the tubing hanger as well as ensuring the latch does not engage
       prematurely and will compensate for the hanger setting process also. Note that the length from the
       snap collet to the anchor latch, MUST BE ADDED to the space out calculation.

    13. Make up the space out joints, tubing hanger, SSSV and control line as per procedure. Repeat Steps
      2 through 9 if an error in the space out is noted. Once the space out has been confirmed, proceed as
       per program.

    14. Slack off, and note any loss of weight as the anchor latch enters the upper seal bore. The space out
       has been designed to not engage the anchor latch during the initial landing of the tubing hanger.
      The note below describes the events that occur when the anchor latch engages. See the Retrieval
       Procedure if this occurs.

NOTE: A 30,000 lb set down load will activate the anchor latch. The shear screws will then shear
       allowing the latch fingers to be supported by the parting ring. The anchor latch will then be
        firmly supported, and all tension generated by the tubing is transmitted to the packer via the
      anchor body, parting ring and latch.

    15. Land out the tubing hanger. The collet should be seen snapping through as the hanger lands and
        the space out can be checked against this as a final check.

    16. Lock down the tubing hanger as per procedures. Pressure test the tubing hanger seals, and test the
         integrity of the SCSSSV control line as per procedures.





             IETC / VIKING : Bldg. No.6, Ghavampour St., N. Sheikh Bahaee Av. , Post Code: 1995763593 Tehran


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 3 از 3 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                                                                                      Revision 00                                    OPERATIONS MANUAL                                                                           Date 11-Feb-2015



                                                                      This document is the property of Viking Completion Technology FZCo.
        Prepared by Colin Boyle                 (VCT) and is confidential.form withoutIt maythe permissionnot be copiedof VCT.or reproduced in any     Page 3 of 3


                                           Rig Site Q. O. P.
                                              7” x 9.625”
                       CRA Snap In Snap Out Production Seal Unit
                                          Assembly

NOTE: This should ensure that the tubing hanger and the SCSSSV are safely in place prior to
      engaging the anchor latch. Completion flexibility is maintained if the anchor latch is engaged
        after all steps are executed.

    17. Rig up and test the annulus to 4,000 psi for 30 minutes. Keep the tubing open during this test, and
       watch for any returns.

    18. Rig up and test the tubing to 4,000 psi for 30 minutes. Keep the annulus open during this test, and
       watch for any returns.

NOTE: While ballooning/reverse ballooning, overflow will be seen through the outlets/string while the
     pumps are building up the pressure and is NOT an indication of leak or bypass from the tie
      back seals.

NOTE: This annulus pressure test will engage the anchor latch by generating in excess of 70,000 lbs
       of downward force at the anchor latch. The seal units are now housed within the upper seal
       bore and retained in the static condition until the value of the parting ring is exceeded
       (200,000 lbs).

                                         Retrieval Procedure

     1. To retrieve the tubing, a tensile pull of greater than the parting ring value (200,000 lbs) must be
        applied to the anchor latch. Once the parting ring shears, the anchor latch fingers collapse releasing
       from the setting sleeve thread. The anchor latch seal assembly can then be pulled from the upper
        seal bore.

     2. The anchor latch uses a left hand Stub Acme thread to connect to the setting sleeve. In the event the
        parting ring fails to part, right hand rotation of approximately 12-15 turns will rotate through the seal
       assembly and will allow the anchor latch to disengage. A slight over pull of 5,000 lbs must be
       maintained during rotation.


      NOTE: THESE PROCEDURES ARE TO BE USED AS A GUIDELINE ONLY.
     HOLE CONDITIONS MAY REQUIRE THESE PROCEDURES TO BE ALTERED.





             IETC / VIKING : Bldg. No.6, Ghavampour St., N. Sheikh Bahaee Av. , Post Code: 1995763593 Tehran


