
When 20´´ casing arrives on board.
Lay out on deck and measure each joint, inspect threads and ensure all O´ rings are installed in each box.
Drift all joints to the specified measurement if required.
Paint the shoe 1m in white or yellow for ROV to visually guide into LPWH.
Remove HPWH protector can and inspect seat area of VX gasket and internal seal areas for any debris or damage.
Install the 18 ¾´´ CART to the HPWH with 5 left hand rotations. Paint a line on the mandrel for visual on makeup to last casing joint. This is to ensure CART is not backing out of HPWH.
Rig up casing equipment on rig floor.
Pick up shoe joint and run in hole. Fill joint with water to check float is working. Fill every joint.
Land joint at rotary table and use dog collar to secure each joint until there is enough weight in string.
Make up torque = 30,000ft/lbs Minimum and 45,000ft/lbs optimum.
Install C´ plate for running inner cement stinger. Record the weight of cement stinger.
Pick up HPWH to rig floor. Great care must be taken at this point, not to damage the HPWH when lifting.
Latch elevators to handling pup above 18 ¾´´ CART.
Make up HPWH to string. Take casing weight and record plus the cement stinger.
Pull the master bushings and run in hole with HPWH and stop at sea level to fill the casing string with water. Use rig pumps to fill the string or put HPWH under the water to let it fill by its self.
When full, pick HPWH up out of water 1 to 2m and install plug to 18 ¾´´ CART. Run to seabed.
On last stand of drill pipe or cement head. Take weight and record.
Have the ROV check the stick up height of the 30´´ housing prior to landing 18 ¾´´ HPWH.
Set down 10 to 15k of 20´´ casing weight to latch the HPWH to the LPWH.
Pick up full casing weight plus landing string weight and 50,000lbs over pull to check that HPWH has latched to the 30´´ LPWH.
Slack the 50,000lbs back down and hold full casing weight for cement job.
After cement job is finished. Wait until cement is set prior to slacking off 20´´full casing weight.
Have ROV fly in and check height of 30´´ and also check 2° slope indicator and record.
Keeping 5 to 10k over pull on landing string. Put 4 ½ right hand rotations into string observed by the ROV to release the 18 ¾´´ CART from the HPWH.
Pull out of hole.
Great care must be taken on the last joint of cement stinger coming out of hole as not to damage the VX gasket seal area. Make sure the cement stinger is central in the HPWH and do not have the string sit around the seal area for any length of time.
Have ROV check the 2° slope indicator one more time and record.


