
Yaran-2
Formation: Sarvak
Cushion: water, height 1373m (2000psi under balance)
Reservoir Pressure: 4550m @ 2740m
Packer depth: 2400m
Condition the well, run 7" scraper and put 50 bbls high viscosity pill at the packer depth.
Pressure test DRLG BOP, burning line and choke manifold according to regulations, DRLG BOP rams size must be compatible with equipment and tubing size. (top rams will be variable)
Verify ID of F.B.DST tools, tubing, drill collars and X-overs. PASS RABIT FROM ALL DC & FBDST TOOLS
Pressure test F.B.DST tools W/6000 psi and function test them.
Prepare suitable slips, elevator and clamps
RIH mule shoe.
Pick up F.B.DST tools with 7" packer, run in hole and fill them with cushion due to below instruction:
Prior to rig up DST tools have a  meeting with Petroleum Engineering witness, Company man, Tool pusher, Safety officer, Driller, Rig crew and every one involve in operation.
Function test will perform with witness before RIH packer assembly.
Torque on each of DST connections to be directed by DST supervisor.
Small amount of pipe dope apply only on pin section of the connections.
Pressure test the BHA with 5000 psi for 15 min when DST tools, drill collars and one stand  3 1/2" tubing are in the hole as per below instruction:
Make sure that DRLG BOP rams and Hydrill are in open position during pressure test and Monitor annulus while test for any return.
Fill up BHA with cushion fluid.
Make up circulating head and tight it with a low torque valve on to the string.
Flash the surface line and pressure test pump truck & surface line against low torque valve to 6000 psi for 10 min.
Open low torque valve and pressure test to 6000 psi for 15 minutes.
During BHA pressure test, string should be latched position in elevator.
If the test is ok, bleed off the pressure slowly.
Continue RIH 3 1/2" TBG and fill them with water as per below instruction.
Fill up TBG with cushion fluid every 5 stands to avoid air trap inside the string.
Maximum RIH speed is 5 minutes from slips to slips.
Apply minimum pipe dope on pin end connection only.
Do not turn the string to the left or right in under any circumstances during RIH.
Cover the string with hole cover to avoid any material accidentally falling into the string.
Pressure test string to 5000 psi as mentioned on step 8 instructions, when:
Packer is in the half way (1200m).
Packer is at the depth of +-2400 m.
Make up surface safety valve with the string and function test it.
Make up flow head with the string, connect kill line to flow head and pressure test flow head, surface safety valve and string together to 6000 psi as mentioned on step 8 instruction.
Close the master valve, bleed off the pressure on top of master valve to 3000 psi and do the negative pressure test on the master valve and open master valve, bleed off the tubing pressure to zero psi.
Disconnect the kill line of flow head.
Set the packer @+-2400 m, close pipe ram and pressure test it to 500psi.
Rig up and connect flow line and kill line of flow head.
Surface well testing equipment pressure test carry out as follows:
Flow head, flow line and choke manifold W/6000 psi.
Separator, surface testing line and burning line W/1000 psi.
Close choke manifold and open master valve.
Hold safety meeting with all operational people.
Close DRLG pipe rams, Open FBDST-S.S.Valve
Observe initial build up pressure behind the choke manifold for 15 minutes.
Open the well for clean up through suitable choke size.
Acidizing will be done if necessary.
Nitrogen lifting will be done by using coiled tubing if necessary.
After clean up the well, divert the flow through separator and measure the oil and gas rate.
Close the well from choke manifold for second build up until B.U. pressure is almost stabilized.
Flow the well ……………………… chock sizes. Compare the results and choke performance, if required change the mentioned chock sizes during FAF.
Test procedure will be decided by P.E on well site. Collect sample, check BS&W, measure API and H2S on each choke size.
Take PVT oil and gas samples on ……….. choke size.
Close FBDST S.S.Valve for main pressure build up.
Take bottom hole samples according to P.E procedure if necessary.
Kill the well according to approved program by Tehran office (by CT displacing the oil in string & below the packer), rig down flow line and kill line and unset the packer.
POOH the test string. Monitoring the annulus while POOH.
M.RAJABI,


