

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 16 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  0160/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (7/91)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  1 of 16

SUBJECT:  USE OF EXPLOSIVES IN DRILLING OPERATIONS

1.    INTRODUCTION TO OFFSHORE EXPLOSIVE TECHNIQUES

       Explosives can be divided into two broad categories - low and high explosives.

1.1   Low Explosives

     Low explosives are employed where their ability to produce large volumes of gas is required as a
       source of energy.  This can be as a propellant to force a projectile in the desired direction or as a
      means of inflation, e.g. in a packer. Low explosives are said to be deflagrating and are initiated by
         ignition (although this may start as impact, e.g. percussion cap). By comparison with high explosives,
       they generate a slow, heaving action.

1.2    High Explosives

       High explosives are used where an instantaneous shattering action - brisance - is required. They are
         initiated by detonation, i.e. by an explosion, and the speed and power of the means of detonation is
        reflected in the speed of the shock waves produced by the high explosive.

1.3    Detonators

      The selection and correct use of an appropriate combination of detonators and accessories is essential
         in achieving a safe and effective result, whilst minimising the physical and environmental hazards.

1.4    Primers

       Primers are used to boost the detonation wave for efficient propagation to the less sensitive explosive
       charges. There are special purpose boosters available, but in most cases detonating cord is used as
       the priming medium.

1.5     Initiation Methods

       Detonators are the most sensitive components in the explosives train. Modern systems have been
       devised to decrease their sensitivity to handling and to make operations involving explosives safer and
      more predictable.

       For underwater explosives operations, the use of straight-forward electrical detonators, which are prone
        to the effects of radiation, has virtually been discontinued. As these detonators could be prematurely
        triggered by voltages induced in the firing circuit from radiating sources such as radar, radio, navigation
       systems, etc., they required radio silence at critical periods.

      They have been replaced by three basic types of detonator:

        a)  The high threshold detonator which employs a resistor to filter stray voltages.

        b)  The magnetically induced detonator which utilises a magnetite ring to induce a current from a
           predetermined cycle surged through a circuit.  This momentarily turns the ring into a transformer
             resulting in initiation of the detonator.

        c)  The exploding bridge wire system which depends on a high voltage and high amperage applied
           over a short time. This ruptures a bridge wire at such a velocity as to produce a detonating wave.

      These systems have been developed to provide a higher degree of safety andreliability.

1.6    Shaping a Charge

      An explosion exerts force in all directions.  Although the explosion from a cartridge in a firearm may
      seem to direct all the force towards propelling the projectile along the barrel, this is not so. Much of the
       energy is absorbed in the breech or chamber, and more is spent in the recoil.   It has been made


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 2 از 16 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  0160/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (7/91)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  2 of 16

SUBJECT:  USE OF EXPLOSIVES IN DRILLING OPERATIONS

       possible to use all the energy shaped or focused into a jet by having the explosive packed behind a
        conical liner. This effect is illustrated in Figure 1.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 3 از 16 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  0160/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (7/91)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  3 of 16

SUBJECT:  USE OF EXPLOSIVES IN DRILLING OPERATIONS

                                                       FIGURE 1


             SHAPED CHARGE - FORMATION OF JET AND SLUG




                                   METAL LINER

                                                                        (1) BEFORE FIRING
        EXPLOSIVE



                                                                        (2) DURING FIRING

         DETONATION
         FRONT

                                                                        (3) DURING FIRING




                                                                        (4) AFTER FIRING





                                                                                                                                                         2179 /147


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 4 از 16 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  0160/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (7/91)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  4 of 16

SUBJECT:  USE OF EXPLOSIVES IN DRILLING OPERATIONS

2.    THE APPLICATION OF EXPLOSIVES IN DRILLING

2.1    Perforating

        Perforating was originally carried out using a propellant cartridge to fire a solid ball into the formation
       through tubing.  This method is still available, but is little used. The Kinley Perforator, however, still
      uses this principle to perforate tubing where bridging problems interrupt circulation.  Nearly all
        perforating is now carried out using shaped charges run on either wireline or drill pipe.  In the former
       method, initiation is by means of a detonator fired by the wireline, and in the latter by firing a cartridge
      by means of impact or pressure.  In both cases a series of shaped charges is detonated virtually
       instantaneously by means of detonating cord, itself detonated by the described initiation methods.

2.2    Pipe Back-Off

       Pipe back-off is achieved by setting off a controlled explosive jarring action to loosen a selected joint.

2.3    Pipe Cutting

       Pipe cutting is possible by means of a shaped charge which has an outward facing circular liner
        providing all round shaping of the charge to give a clean cut on detonation (Figure 2).

2.4    Collar Cutting

        Collar cutting is more difficult to accomplish because of the thickness of metal involved. A technique
       using a collision charge is used.  This involves a container of explosives with a detonator above and
       another below the charge (Figure 3). Simultaneous detonation results in two shock waves converging
      and colliding with the result that they force each other sideways, thus cutting the chosen collar.

2.5    Side-Wall Coring

        Side-wall coring is used to obtain small samples of the formation.  It is accomplished by firing a hollow
         “bullet” into the formation. The bullet, with its formation sample, is held captive by short cables and is
       recovered by pulling the gun out of the hole.

2.6   Junk Shot

      Where undrillable junk, e.g. twisted-off rock bit, is preventing drilling and cannot be fished, a large
      shaped charge can be used to shatter the obstruction. The fragments are then retrieved with a magnet
        or junk basket. The junk shot is either run on drill pipe or wireline. A built-in stand-off ensures that the
       charge is at the correct distance from the obstruction.

2.7    Wellhead Recovery from a Drilling Rig

     On abandonment, wellhead recovery from a drilling rig can be accomplished using explosives to sever
       casings in much the same way as collar cutting, but using a much larger collision charge (Figure 4).

2.8    Wellhead Removal from a Diving Support Vessel (DSV)

      Wellhead recovery from a Diving Support Vessel (DSV) is carried out when the rig has moved off
        location.  It is not unusual to contract a DSV to recover more than one wellhead in an operation. The
      method of severing the casings is similar to collar cutting. The main difference is that divers guide the
       charge assembly into the hole as it is being lowered on the load-line from the DSV. A “cross-piece” is
         fitted to the load-line to give the correct distance the charge must be in the hole, which is usually 5m
        (Figure 5). When the Diving Supervisor is satisfied the charge is correctly placed, he will recover the
        diver/diving bell to the surface before the charge is fired.

            If a corrosion cap is set, the divers will be required to remove it before cutting operations begin.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 5 از 16 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  0160/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (7/91)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  5 of 16

SUBJECT:  USE OF EXPLOSIVES IN DRILLING OPERATIONS

                                                          FIGURE 2
               JET TUBING CUTTER         JET CASING CUTTER





                                                          FIGURE 3
                          COLLAR CUTTER
                   SANDLINE
                    (OR DRILL-PIPE)


                                                        FIRING LINE





                           EXPLOSIVE


                                                 DETONATORS





                                                                                                                                                                2179 /146


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 6 از 16 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  0160/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (7/91)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  6 of 16

SUBJECT:  USE OF EXPLOSIVES IN DRILLING OPERATIONS

                                                            FIGURE 4
                     WELLHEAD SEVERING CHARGE
                                                    DRILL PIPE

                                                      FIRING MODULE
                                                        INITIATING CABLE
                                               VENTED TOOL
                                             ATTACHMENT



                                                 BALLAST CONTAINER

                                                   EXPLOSIVE CONTAINER
                                                    CASINGS





                                                            FIGURE 5
                    DIVER GUIDING CHARGE INTO WELLHEAD


                 LOADLINE

                   FIRING
                CABLE

                                                                    DIVING                 CROSS                                                               BELL                  PIECE


                DEPTH CHARGE
                    IN THE HOLE

                 BALLAST DRUM

                 EXPLOSIVE
               CHARGE





                                                                                                                                                                     2179 /145


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 7 از 16 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  0160/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (7/91)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  7 of 16

SUBJECT:  USE OF EXPLOSIVES IN DRILLING OPERATIONS

     When the wellhead has been severed the diver will connect the DSV crane to the base.   It is then
       recovered to the surface. The crane should be rated to a minimum of 60t SWL to overcome the weight
        of grout, cement and effects of suction.

3.    INFORMATION REQUIRED TO PERFORM EXPLOSIVE OPERATIONS

      The work to be done must be specified in sufficient detail to allow the explosives service company to
      produce procedures. The procedures should be submitted to Drilling for approval and any major
      changes to the procedures must be agreed before implementation.

3.1    Perforating

     A large range of shaped charges is available to suit different tubular sizes. A charge’s performance is
       governed by the angle of the conical liner.

            It is the responsibility of the Petroleum Engineering Department to:

          •  Specify which charges are required to optimise performance in the formation to be perforated.

          •  Provide the explosives service company with information on the zone or zones to be perforated and
          the spacing and direction of the charges.

          •  Provide an engineer to look after their interests on the rig during perforating operations.

      The Drilling Supervisor is responsible for the running of the operation.

      Note:
       Top-driveisolation-seeNote4.3.

3.2    Pipe Back-Off

      Assuming the Free Point Indicator tool has indicated the free point, it will be necessary to work out the
        point at which back-off is to be attempted. Since this is most likely to be successful at a joint which is
       normally broken when tripping, the joint nearest above the free point should be identified and its depth
       given to the service company. A discussion should take place on the type of thread, torque used in
      make-up and the reverse torque turns required to achieve back-off on firing the jarring charge.

3.3    Pipe Cutting

      Where back-off is unsuccessful, a severing charge can be used at the chosen joint.   It is obviously
       easier to cut the drill pipe in the middle section rather than at a connection.

3.4    Collar Cutting

      The information required by the service company is again the identification of the most suitable free
          joint.

3.5    Side-Wall Coring

      The cores are required by Geology Department who will specify the depths at which cores are to be
       obtained and will witness the operation. Drilling will be responsible for the running of the operation.

3.6   Junk Shot

      The explosives service company require to know the nature of the junk material in order to decide the
        size of junk shot required.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 8 از 16 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  0160/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (7/91)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  8 of 16

SUBJECT:  USE OF EXPLOSIVES IN DRILLING OPERATIONS

3.7    Wellhead Recovery from a Rig

       Information required by the explosives service company includes:

        a)  Number of casings to be cut.
        b)  Grade of casings to be cut.
        c)  Water depth.

3.8    Wellhead Recovery from a DSV

        a)  Well locations and number.
        b)  Number of casings.
        c)  Grade of casings.
        d)  Water depth.
        e)  Condition and weight of wellhead.
           f)   Proximity to other wellheads, debris, etc.
        g)  Where the wellheads are to be off-loaded.
        h)  Depth of cut required.

4.    SAFETY CONSIDERATIONS

4.1    General

      The following safety points offer guidance to the BP Drilling Supervisor and OIM’s involved in
       overseeing explosives operations, and should be read in conjunction with BPPD Standard HS&E
       Regulations, Chapter 30.

4.2    Responsibilities

      The BP Drilling Supervisor and OIM in an operation involving the use of explosives have a
       responsibility to be fully aware of all the aspects and limitations connected with their
       applications, and a duty to ensure the rigid enforcement of safety regulations.

      An Explosives Engineer experienced in the safe handling and use of explosives should be placed in
        overall charge of the explosives operation and be responsible to the BP Drilling Supervisor/OIM for its
       conduct and the health and safety of all personnel involved.

       His responsibilities will include:

          •  Advising the OIM/Drilling Supervisor on aspects of the explosives operation.

          •  Ensuring the explosives are “fit for purpose” and correctly stored.

          •  Making-up and deploying the charges.

          •  Supervision of all persons involved in explosives handling.

          •  Implementation of the Service Company Regulations.

          •  Ensuring that all explosives that are to remain onboard are correctly stored and accounted for.

          •  Preparing surplus explosives for back-loading and ensuring that they are correctly labelled and
          manifested.

      The allocation of responsibility must be clear and should be published and distributed to ensure that all
       the appropriate parties are informed.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 9 از 16 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  0160/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (7/91)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  9 of 16

SUBJECT:  USE OF EXPLOSIVES IN DRILLING OPERATIONS

4.3   Ready Use Storage on Site

      The storage area selected for the explosives and accessories required to be used on site should fulfil
       the following minimum requirements:

          •  Remote from any Hazardous Area.

          •  Remote from the living accommodation.

          •  Remote from any source of heat or flame.

          •  Insulated against shock.

          •  Protected from blast debris.

          •  Well ventilated and dry.

          •  Remote from possible Electro Magnetic emission hazards.

        Note:
      On rigs equipped with an electric top-drive, the top-drive motor must be electrically isolated before
         runningexplosivesonelectricwireline.

          •  Free of grit, or the explosives must be mounted on wooden pallets with a grit free surround.

          •    If a storage area is on a vessel, it must have wooden walls and floor and offer secure storage in the
          event of rough weather.

          •  The exterior should be painted red with the word “DANGER” painted by the door of the magazine or
           container. Appropriate hazard labels should also be displayed on the vertical sides of the magazine
           or container.

        In addition, the area must be clearly marked with warning and “No Smoking” signs in white letters on a
       red background.  There must be separate storage for detonators, and all storage areas must be
       secured and locked against unauthorised entry.

4.4    Issue of Stores

      The OIM should authorise all issues of explosives and accessories and ensure that:

          •  The explosives are not approached or handled by unauthorised persons.

          •  Surplus stores are returned to the magazine/explosives container prior to firing.

          •  The “explosive register” is kept up-to-date and all issues and returns noted, including material
        damaged and destroyed.

          •  Detonators are drawn only immediately prior to firing by the Explosives Engineer.

4.5    Explosives Register

      An explosives register shall be kept by the OIM for the purpose of complying with the Health & Safety at
      Work etc. Act 1974, and shall be maintained at those locations where the explosives certificate holders
       are based.  It shall contain the following information:

        a)   Details of all receipts.
        b)   Details of all issues, and where being used.
        c)   Details of all explosives used in each operation.
        d)   Details of all misfired shots.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 10 از 16 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  0160/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (7/91)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  10 of 16

SUBJECT:  USE OF EXPLOSIVES IN DRILLING OPERATIONS

        e)   Details of all explosives returned.
           f)   Details of disposal and destruction of old stock.

4.6    After Firing

     On completion of explosives work, all unused and misfired explosives must be returned to the
        store/freight travel container and the “Explosives Register” updated. Any shortage must be the subject
        of an immediate enquiry conducted by the OIM. Unless this resolves the situation, the Police must be
       informed by the OIM.

      Note:
      Explosives must not be stored on offshore installations for longer than is absolutely necessary.
       Explosivessostoredshallbetheminimumquantitydeemednecessarytocarryoutthejob.

4.7    Radio/Radar Silence During Explosives Operations

       During operations involving explosives, sources of “stray” induced currents, e.g. welding sets or
       cathodic protection which may be deemed as possible “triggers” to detonators, must be shutdown/
       switched off beforemakingup any explosive tool or device (see 4.3 - electrical isolation of top-drive).

      These limitations must be enforced from the time when the Electro Explosives Devices (EED’s) are
      removed from the store until the time when the armed charge is 100 metres or more below the seabed
        or ground level.

      The limitations must be re-imposed at the 100 metre level when the shot, fired or not, is being brought
      back to the surface, until it is declared safe by the Explosives Supervisor.

      The OIM is responsible for ensuring that the correct procedures are instituted by way of the Control
     Room and Radio Operators (see BPPD HSE Regulations, Appendix 30.3 “Radio Silence Whilst
       Operations Involving the Use of Explosives are in Progress”).

      The offshore installation’s standby vessel should be in visual signalling distance of the installation
       during such periods of radio silence.

4.8    Safety Distances

     An underwater explosion will create shock waves and other forces which could damage rigs,
        installations and vessels. To avoid damage, tables have been evolved by vessel and rig owners
        indicating safe distances from explosions.

      Dependent on the weight, type and the location of the charge, the Explosives Engineer will calculate the
       predicted pressure and bubble effects. He will advise the OIM/Master of the required safety distance
       from the charge. The BP Drilling Supervisor should ensure that the safety distances are adhered to.

      The intended weight and type of explosives will be determined in the approved procedures.   If  it is
       considered necessary by the Explosives Engineer to increase the agreed charge weight or type of
        explosives, it must be justified and endorsed by the Drilling office.

      The maximum weight of explosives used during wellhead severing operations is about 35 lbs (TNT
        equivalent).  It should be noted that the effects of the shock waves on the hull of a vessel or rig from 35
        lbs TNT set in the hole for wellhead severing operations is approximately equal to 2 lbs TNT detonated
      on the seabed.

4.9    Legislation and Guidance

        a)  XTC Drilling Policy & Guidelines Manual.

        b)  Petroleum (Production) (Seaward Areas) Regulations, 1988.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 11 از 16 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  0160/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (7/91)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  11 of 16

SUBJECT:  USE OF EXPLOSIVES IN DRILLING OPERATIONS

        c)  The Offshore Installations (Construction & Survey) Regulations 1974.

        d)  The Offshore Installations (Operational Safety Health & Welfare) Regulations 1976.

        e)  The Explosives Acts 1875 and 1923.

           f)  UKOOA Council Minutes of 13th June 1979.

        g)  Continental Shelf Operations Notice No. 11.

        h)  The Classification and Labelling of Explosives Regulations 1983.

            i)  BPPD Standard HS & E Regulations, Chapter 30.

            j)   D.O.T. “Carriage of Dangerous Goods in Ships” (The Blue Book).

        k)  The Air Navigation (Dangerous Goods) Regulations, 1984.

            l)  The Dangerous Substances in Harbour Areas Regulations, SI 37/87.

      m) Exemption from the Requirements of Article 44 of the Air Navigation Order 1985, CAA Ref.
          000583.

        n)  BPPD (HTH) Safety Flash 3/86. Perforating gun trapped pressure hazard.

5.    RESTRICTED AREAS

5.1    Rig Floor

     When operations are about to begin on the rig floor, the area must be cleared of all non-essential
       personnel. While the Explosives Engineer is making up the charges or mixing two-part liquid explosive,
       only service company operative(s) and a rig supervisor (OIM’s competent person or BP Drilling
       Supervisor) should be present.

5.2   DSV

     When operating from a vessel, the designated area where the explosives container and magazine is
        sited should be restricted to personnel as for rig floor operations.

6.    DIVING OPERATIONS USING EXPLOSIVES

6.1   When divers are required to place explosives, i.e. wellhead removal from a DSV, they will remain under
       the control and responsibility of the Dive Supervisor. The Dive Supervisor will take advice from the
       Explosives Supervisor as to how and where the charges will be deployed and placed.

      The Dive Supervisor must have custody of the dynamo exploder and firing key at all times when the bell
         is unmated from the dive system and/or when divers are in the water.

      The bell must be on-deck or mated to the system before the explosives are fired.

6.2    Commercial divers must never be called upon to handle unexploded bombs, mines or other military
       explosive devices.  If explosives are found during diving operations, the Drilling Supervisor/OIM should
       contact his management during working hours and the Dyce Operations Control Centre (to contact the
       Duty Diving Operations Superintendent), out of working hours. The site should be cleared until the
       appropriate authorities declare it safe to continue work.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 12 از 16 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  0160/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (7/91)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  12 of 16

SUBJECT:  USE OF EXPLOSIVES IN DRILLING OPERATIONS

6.3    Diving/Perforating Operations

            It is acceptable to carry out diving and perforating operations simultaneously providing the following
       precautions are observed.

      The Dive Supervisor must satisfy himself that the rig is observing radio silence.

     He should ensure that the “firing key” is removed from the firing panel and in his custody.

      The Diver is to return into the bell during the period of radio silence including the retrieval of the gun to
       the surface.

      The Diver must return to the bell stage before the gun is fired.

      Note:
        Itisadvisabletopositionthebellasfaraspracticablefromthewellheadduringperforatingoperations.

7.    PRECAUTIONS DURING EXPLOSIVES OPERATIONS

        Prior to explosives operations, ensure that the following measures are taken:

        a)  Inform all shipping and installations in the area that subsea explosives operations will commence in
           approximately 30 minutes (repeat at 5 minutes before firing).

        b)  Withdraw hot work permits for welding work.

        c)  Ensure that there is no smoking in the area where charges are being made up.

        d)  Ensure that radio/radar restrictions are in force.

        e)  Ensure that fire extinguishers are placed near the explosives container.

           f)   Ensure that warning signs are prominently placed and red flags are displayed.

        g)  Ensure that rig/vessel transducers, transponders (including radio and radar DP beacons) are
            hoisted inboard and shutdown.  If acoustic beacons are used as in DP vessels, there is no need to
           shut them down.

        h)  Broadcast to all personnel that explosives will be fired within 30 minutes, and the siren will be
          sounded 1 minute before blasting.

            i)   Ensure that prior to helicopter operations the rig/vessel instructs the pilot to switch off all of the
              aircraft’s transmitting systems.

            j)   Ensure that the vessel/rig is the correct distance from the charge.

        k)  Ensure that all loose explosives and detonators are correctly stored.

            l)   Ensure that, on completion of operations, shipping and installations are informed.

      m)  Ensure that, on completion of operations, it is broadcast to personnel that it is “all clear”.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 13 از 16 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  0160/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (7/91)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  13 of 16

SUBJECT:  USE OF EXPLOSIVES IN DRILLING OPERATIONS

8.    EXPLOSIVES HANDLING, LEGAL AND PROCEDURAL ASPECTS

8.1    Legal

      The Legislation requires that there be written instructions “specifying practices to be observed to ensure
       the safety of the installation and safe use of the equipment thereon”.  This is the responsibility of the
         Installation Owner. The written instructions should include:

       Appointment of a “competent person” who will be responsible for the handling, storage, issuing, use of,
       documentation and transport of explosives within the sphere of responsibility of the OIM.

      As Concession Owners, BP have the responsibility to ensure that the Installation Owner (OIM) carries
       out his duties and provides a Safe System of Work.

9.    PROCEDURES AND AUDITS

9.1    Audits

       For all explosives operations, BP will contract a company specialising in such work.

      The explosives service company will be audited by BP to ensure that they are responsible and capable
        of carrying out work on BP sites and that they meet the legal and BP requirements. The audit will be
        carried out annually or as deemed necessary by BP.

9.2    Requirements of Audits

     A requirement of the audit is that the explosives service company submit to BP copies of their Company
        details and procedures, including:

          •  Safety Manuals and Contingency Plans.
          •  CV’s of Operations staff.
          •  Management Organigram and Responsibilities.
          •  Base Facilities.
          •  Magazine and Explosives Storage Facilities.
          •  Transport arrangements for explosives to and from BP Sites.
          •  Training methods for Company personnel.

9.3    Procedures

      The explosives service company will be required to submit details and procedures for the particular
      worksiteandoperation, including:

          •  Safety and Contingency Plans.
          •  Personnel, Responsibilities and Qualifications.
          •  Work plan including type and weights of explosives.
          •   Certification of Plant and Equipment.
          •  Transport and Storage of Explosives.

     When the details and procedures have been agreed by Drilling Department, they will be copied to the
     BP Drilling Supervisor onsite and should be considered as the formal Guidelines for the work. Any
       major changes from the agreed procedures should be confirmed with Drilling Department before
       implementation.

       While BP have a responsibility to ensure that the work is carried out safely in accordance with a permit
        to work and a written safe procedure etc., we should not interfere in the technical expertise for which we
      have contracted and for which the explosives service company is responsible in law.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 14 از 16 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  0160/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (7/91)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  14 of 16

SUBJECT:  USE OF EXPLOSIVES IN DRILLING OPERATIONS

9.4    Post Operations Report

     On completion of the work, the explosives operating company will compile an “Operations Report”. The
         Drilling Supervisor should ensure that he receives a copy of the report, and forwards a copy to LOG
       (Explosives Advisor) for information and filing.

9.5    Offloading and Storage

      The area in which explosives are stored must be chosen to comply with legislation and be marked on
       the rig plans as required by Legislation (SI 1019).  Consignments of explosives arriving on the
         installation should be craned to this dedicated area, and, if not already in weatherproof containers, the
       contents should be transferred to the explosives store and the explosives register updated accordingly.
            If the consignment must be kept elsewhere on the rig (e.g. carrier guns), then that place must be
       demarcated.  In all cases, the crane operator must be aware that he is handling explosives which may
      be sensitive to impact.

10.   PERSONNEL

10.1  Manning Levels

       For safety and operational reasons consideration must be given to the practice of employing only one
       Explosives Operator on sites where  it can be expected that he will be working for abnormally long
        periods. An error due to tiredness could be catastrophic.

            It is desirable to deploy a minimum of two explosives personnel, one being the Explosives Engineer
        with specific duties and responsibilities, the other being his assistant with sufficient knowledge and
        maturity to carry out work unsupervised upon the Engineer’s instructions.

10.2   Qualifications

       For wellhead severing operations, demolition and cutting work, the Explosives Engineer will be an
        individual Member of the Institute of Explosives Engineers with at least three years experience of
        offshore explosives work.

       Other personnel working to the instructions of the Explosives Engineer should ideally be associate
      Members of the Institute, or experienced in offshore explosives operations.

     When wireline operations are used with explosives, i.e. perforating, etc., it is unlikely that the personnel
         will need formal explosives qualifications. The Drilling Superintendent or others responsible for
       contracting explosives users should use their discretion in ensuring that the operators are suitably
        qualified and experienced for such specialist operations.

       Only personnel who have been approved for explosives work will be allowed to work on BP sites.

10.3  Log Books

     A scheme has been introduced by the major explosives operating companies and in conjunction with
       the Institute of Explosives Engineers whereby all operatives keep a Log Book of their work experience
      and training. Since BP are required by law to employ offshore only those experienced in that operation,
       the log book will assist greatly in ensuring that operatives proposed in contract bids comply with this
       requirement. The Log Book is not a legal document, but it will offer the onsite BP Drilling Supervisor the
        opportunity to assess the experience and capabilities of the explosives operatives under his control.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 15 از 16 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  0160/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (7/91)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  15 of 16

SUBJECT:  USE OF EXPLOSIVES IN DRILLING OPERATIONS

11.   REPORTING PROCEDURES

     When near seabed use of explosives is planned the MOD must be informed by telex.  This will be
       undertaken by the drilling office. Refer to the BP Reporting Procedures Manual for the required telex
         details.

12.   CONTROL AND MOVEMENT OF EXPLOSIVE MATERIALS

12.1  Road

            It is essential that a record of control shall be kept of the movement of explosive materials. A simple
      system has been devised to ensure that this control is maintained.

            It is the responsibility of the Field Group/Divisional Safety Officer to maintain a record of this control but
         this does not preclude interested parties maintaining a similar control should they so wish.

      The driver should have a statement of the quantity and description of the explosives being carried. This
       should be checked with the person taking delivery who should sign the statement as a form of receipt
         for the driver.

      The Department, Contractor or Supplier concerned in the despatch of explosive materials will advise
       the Field Group/Divisional Safety Officer, Stores Department (Receiving Warehouse) and the recipient
        at the final destination by telex giving the following information:

        a)  Nature of explosives, e.g. shaped charge, flare, rockets, etc.

        b)  Time and date sent and by what mode of transportation.

        c)   Destination - final and interim.

      Where the explosive material is handled at interim destinations, the same procedures will be carried
        out.

     When the explosive material has reached its final destination, the recipient shall forward a telex
       confirming its receipt.

     A maximum 6 hour time delay is allowed from each ETA at each given destination before a search
       action shall be initiated by the Field Group/Divisional Safety Officer in conjunction with Stores
       Department to establish the whereabouts of the explosive material and the cause of delay.

12.2  Sea

      The explosives service company must present the explosives package(s) at the BP Base properly
       packaged, labelled and documented to comply with the IMDG Code. On completion of the explosives
        operations, the senior operative must prepare his stores for the return trip and assist the OIM (or his
       competent person) with the documentation, labelling, etc.

      Note:
     Whenexplosivesarebackloadedfromtherig,theBPDrillingSupervisor/OIMshouldensurethatatelex
       is sent to the BP Base, who will then advise the service company of the ETA so that they may collect
       theirexplosivesonthevessel’sarrival.

12.3   Air

       Generally transportation of explosives is forbidden in both passenger and cargo aircraft. However, the
         Civil Aviation Authority granted certain exemptions from the Air Navigation Order 1985, quote: “Please
        find enclosed an exemption from the above order enabling ............... Ltd. to carry limited quantities of


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 16 از 16 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  0160/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (7/91)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  16 of 16

SUBJECT:  USE OF EXPLOSIVES IN DRILLING OPERATIONS

       explosives on board helicopters engaged on offshore operations in support of the oil and gas industries”
          - unquote.

       Copies of the CAA exemptions are distributed to Drilling Department by LOG as required.

      The limited quantities of explosives allowed to be transported will vary depending on classification.

        In compliance with legislation all packaging and documentation must comply with the “Technical
        Instructions for the Safe Transport of Dangerous Goods by Air” approved and published by decision of
       the Council of the Inter- national Civil Aviation Organisation - the ICAO Handbook.

      Both the helicopter company and the explosives operating company have responsibility for the
       packaging and labelling of the explosives to be transported. The BP Central Receipt Point (CRP) have
         staff trained to standards required by ICAO to receive and ensure that the cargo is correctly labelled,
        etc.

            It is not acceptable practice to use BP transport to collect explosives from the explosives operating
      company base.


