

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 2 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
            UK Operations              Section    :  0400/GEN
             GUIDELINES FOR           Rev.         :  3 (3/95)
BP EXPLORATION   DRILLING OPERATIONS                                                         Page        :  1 of 2

 SUBJECT: WELL CONTROL PROCEDURES

  1.    WELL CONTROL POLICY

          In accordance with Section 2.6 of the BPX Drilling Policy, dated 12/92, the BPX Well Control Manuals
        (Volumes I and II) constitute policy. However, if a formal and specific dispensation from this Policy has
       been granted, an alternative (contractor's) procedure (well shut-in method, etc.) MAY be followed in
         preference.

  2.    DRILLING

          In addition to the above referenced Well Control Policy, the following statements apply:

  2.1       It is a primary responsibility of the BP Drilling Supervisor to ensure that BP Well Control Policies and
        Procedures are adopted.

  2.2    The subject of Well Control must be discussed with the Contractor Toolpusher to ensure:

         a)  BP Well Control Policies as set down in the Drilling Policy Document are understood and adhered
               to by supervisory personnel.

         b)  BP Well Control Procedures as set down in the BP Well Control Manual are understood and
               correctly implemented.

          c)  Standing Orders for Well Close-In Procedures have been posted at the Driller's position, and that
                  all responsible personnel fully understand them.

         d)   All relevant rig equipment is competent and adequately tested to ensure that a flowing well can be
               controlled.

         e)  The well status and all operations are constantly reviewed to ensure that the ability to control the
              well is not impaired.

  2.3    The following equipment must be available while drilling:

         1)   Hydril drop-in BOP located in the BHA.  Dart to be kept in Driller’s doghouse (refer to Section
            5410/GEN).

         2)   Full opening kelly cock to be installed below the kelly at all times. Back-up to be available on rig
                floor.

         3)    If available, a suitably rated circulating head with short joint of S135 drill pipe below to be available
                for immediate installation when drilling or tripping. Also sufficient length of suitably pressure rated
               circulating hose to be available for use with the circulating head.

         4)  Back-up manual adjustable drilling choke spares to be available and stored near the choke
              manifold.

         5)  A drillable bridge plug with drill pipe running tool and retrievable bridge plug/storm valve assembly
               to be available on board for 13 3/8” and smaller casings to cover the event of having to pull the
         BOP stack with hydrocarbon bearing zones in open hole.

  2.4    The BOP stack configuration must conform with Company Policy.

      A diagram showing ram positions in the stack and the depths to each ram below rotary table and below
      MSL is to be clearly displayed. On semi-submersible units a procedure for estimating the tidal height is
          to be immediately available using tide height charts or guidewire markers. Depths can be accurately
        checked when testing the BOP.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 2 از 2 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
            UK Operations              Section    :  0400/GEN
             GUIDELINES FOR           Rev.         :  3 (3/95)
BP EXPLORATION   DRILLING OPERATIONS                                                         Page        :  2 of 2

 SUBJECT: WELL CONTROL PROCEDURES

  2.5   On subsea BOP stacks both control pods on the BOP stack must be operational for drilling to continue.
               If one pod fails then the pipe should be hung off with the bit at the shoe and the well closed in (including
        shear rams) until the repair is completed.   If both pods fail then a cement plug or bridge plug must be
         set prior to any repair work.  In certain circumstances, drilling or other open hole operations may be
         allowed to continue after consultation with the drilling office.

  2.6    The well will be flow checked always prior to tripping, after pulling into the casing shoe and before the
      BHA enters the BOP stack. The minimum length of a flow check will be 15 minutes. Ensure that the
         hole  fill pump from the trip tank is running continually and that the trip tank level indicator is operating
         smoothly. On semi-submersible units this will help to overcome the effects of rig heave. The Drilling
         Supervisor is to be on the rig floor to observe the first 10 stands pulled off bottom.

  2.7   When swabbing is anticipated on trips, avoid pumping a heavy pill which will disguise the swabbing.
         Instead, pump the pill when swabbing has stopped, or at the shoe.

  2.8   Mud weight while drilling should be sufficient to give at least 200 psi overbalance on known or predicted
         formation pressures. On semi-submersible units, in most situations the mud weight should afford 100
          psi overbalance on formation pressure with the riser removed. The well will always be drilled in a
       manner which allows primary well control to be maintained by the use of mud weight.

  2.9   On exploration/appraisal wells, one mud pit (typically 300 bbl) of heavy mud must always be available
         with mud weight 0.25 SG higher than the drilling mud weight, and with similar rheology.

 2.10    All pit level monitoring equipment must be observed at all times when in open hole. Any pit increase
       must be checked, and the derrickman must always inform the driller and the mud loggers when
        changing tank levels.

 2.11   The degasser is to be operated daily and always during bottoms up circulation after tripping. The
        equipment must be maintained and operating efficiently.

 2.12   At the start of his tour the driller must check that choke manifold valves, and subsea valves on floating
          units, are correctly set and that the line from the chokes to the degasser is open.

 2.13  When running casing, a casing to drill pipe crossover (to allow casing to be landed on the rams on
          floating units) and a casing circulating swage (to allow casing to be circulated) are to be available on
         the rig floor.

  3.    WELL CONTROL RESPONSE PROCEDURES

  3.1     In the event of a well control incident, and once the well has been shut-in using the appropriate
         technique/procedure, all appropriate installation staff must be informed (e.g. OIM, Toolpusher, BP
           Drilling Supervisor, etc.).

  3.2   The BP Drilling Supervisor/Representative must contact the appropriate DS (or Duty DS  if outwith
        normal office hours). The OIM must contact the appropriate onshore control centre (the DOCC in the
        case of Dyce-based operations), and if appropriate, the Coastguard.

       The above steps are in accordance with the first few essential steps as detailed in the 'Well Incident
       Response Procedures", a controlled manual issued by PSR (reference number PSR-W20). This also
        contains further detail of how, through activating the Well Incident Group (WIG), the onshore
         organisation will provide appropriate technical support. This group does not duplicate any aspect of the
         operational support (evacuation and rescue of site personnel, etc.) provided through activation of the
      ERC (Emergency Response Centre) in BP's Dyce office.

               It should be borne in mind that, in addition to covering incidents during drilling operations, the Well
         Incident Group procedures also apply to ANY well-related incident during well completions, workovers,
        maintenance activities, and non-rig well servicing operations.


