

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 2 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
            UK Operations              Section    :  0402/GEN
             GUIDELINES FOR           Rev.         :  0 (05/96)
BP EXPLORATION   DRILLING OPERATIONS                                                         Page        :  1 of 2

 SUBJECT: WELL CONTROL IN HIGH ANGLE OR HORIZONTAL WELLS

  1.    KICK PREVENTION AND DETECTION

           All techniques used in vertical wells for avoiding and detecting kicks can be applied to high angle or
         horizontal wells.

         Kick intensity is potentially high when drilling a horizontal well due to the longer exposed hole section to
         the producing formation.

       The swab/surge pressure is relatively higher in a high angle or horizontal well. To prevent swabbed
          kicks, it is important to ensure that:

            •  The mud rheology is conditioned prior to tripping out

            •  The tripping speed is controlled below the maximum allowable speed

            •  The correct tripping procedures are followed

       The equivalent circulating density (ECD) is relatively high when drilling a high angle well. This means a
         greater bottom-hole pressure reduction when circulation stops. Therefore  it is important to flow-check
         the well prior to making a connection or tripping to ensure that the well is stable without the ECD effect.

  2.    WELL SHUT-IN AND GAS KICK MIGRATION

       Use hard (fast) shut-in method to shut in the well upon detecting a kick to minimise the kick volume.
         Studies showed that the potential water-hammer effect associated with the hard shut-in is negligible.

      When a kick occurs in a high angle or horizontal hole section, the shut-in drillpipe pressure (SIDPP) will
       be close or equal to the shut-in casing pressure (SICP). This is because the kick only causes a small or
       no hydrostatic pressure reduction in the annulus.

        Zero shut-in pressures (SIDPP and SICP) do not mean there is no kick. Together with a positive pit
         gain, this may indicate that the kick is still in the horizontal hole section which may be caused by
        swabbing or improper hole fillup on trips.

       The conventional method, which determines the influx density/type (gas/water/oil) based on pit gain,
       SIDPP and SICP, can not be applied in a high angle or horizontal well. There is no simple alternative
       method for field applications. However, a gas influx can be recognised by the continuous increase in
         the casing pressure due to gas expansion above the horizontal hole section, which may be caused by
        gas migration during shut-in or by mud circulation.

        During the well shut-in period, the free gas usually migrates up the annulus if the angle is below 90°.
        Experiments showed that, for a mud with PV=10 cP and YP=6 lbf/100sqft, the gas migrates at about
         10,000, 9500 and 7500ft/hr at vertical, 50° and 80°, respectively. The migration rate will be lower if the
      mud has a higher yield stress or gel.

      Do not calculate the migration rate based on the increase in SICP, as it often seriously underpredicts
         the migration rate.

       Gas does not migrate if:

            •  The hole angle is 90° or higher;

            •  The gas is dissolved in the OBM; or

            •  The gas is trapped as small bubbles in mud by its high gel strength


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 2 از 2 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
            UK Operations              Section    :  0402/GEN
             GUIDELINES FOR           Rev.         :  0 (05/96)
BP EXPLORATION   DRILLING OPERATIONS                                                         Page        :  2 of 2

 SUBJECT: WELL CONTROL IN HIGH ANGLE OR HORIZONTAL WELLS

  3.    WELL KILLING OPERATIONS

       The advantages of the wait-and-weight method over the driller’s method are less important in a high
        angle or horizontal well. This is because the weighted mud will not reduce the surface and casing shoe
        pressures until it has passed the high angle or horizontal hole section. By then the gas influx may have
         entered into the casing or been circulated out of the well.

      Do not wait for the mud being weighted up. Start to circulate using the driller’s method once a kick is
         detected; change over to the wait-and-weight method once the kill weight mud is ready (circulate and
         weight method). This will minimise the time of dealing with the kick and reduce the risks of stuck pipe
       and other hole problems.

      When pumping down the kill weight mud, use the kick sheet designed for high angle wells to work out
         the standpipe pressure schedule. Do not use the kill sheet designed for vertical wells, as it will result in
        excessive high well pressures and the possible consequence of fracturing the formation.

        During circulating out a gas kick, the free gas will slip through and travel faster than the mud, even in a
         horizontal hole section. Studies showed that the slip velocity is in the range of 60 to 180ft/min,
        depending upon the mud rheology and hole angle etc. Therefore the gas kick may arrive at surface
       much earlier than the mud.

  4.    FREE GAS KICKS IN INVERTED (>90°) HOLE SECTION

               If a gas kick occurs when drilling an inverted hole section, the free gas will be trapped at the bottom of
         the hole when circulation stops. Similar scenario may also occur in washouts or undulations of a
         horizontal hole section. Studies showed that the free gas will remain being trapped unless the annular
      mud velocity exceeds about 100ft/min, which is higher than that at a commonly used SCR during well
            killing operations. Therefore special well killing techniques may have to be considered.

       The trapped gas may be flushed out by gradually increasing the SCR to a corresponding annular
          velocity of about 100 to 150ft/min for a short period of time (say 1/4 of bottom-up maximum). Then
        reduce to a normal SCR and proceed using a conventional well killing technique (driller’s or wait-and-
         weight). Depending on the kick volume and the length of the hole section, the procedures may have to
       be repeated in order to remove the trapped gas completely. So prior to drilling the hole section, the
       pump pressure at an SCR corresponding to 100 to 150ft/min should be recorded.

               If the above technique fails to remove the trapped gas, consider bullheading the gas back into the
         formation. As the trapped gas should be near the kicking formation, bullheading is more likely to
        succeed in an inverted hole section.


