

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 1 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
            UK Operations              Section    :  0403/GEN
             GUIDELINES FOR           Rev.         :  0 (05/96)
BP EXPLORATION   DRILLING OPERATIONS                                                         Page        :  1 of 1

 SUBJECT: WELL CONTROL WHILST LOGGING

  1.    PREPARATION

        Hold a pre-logging safety meeting prior to commencing logging operations on the well in question and
         include in the discussion the shut-in procedure with wireline in the hole.

       The formal posted procedure should state that whenever pipe is out of the hole, the blind/shear rams
        should be closed if the well kicks, however, this action may not be totally appropriate if we have logging
         cable in the hole/across the stack. Below is a procedure which outlines the actions with wireline in the
         hole/across the stack if a well control scenario exists.

  2.    PROCEDURE WHILST LOGGING ACROSS THE RESERVOIR/OPEN HOLE

       The well must be monitored at all times whilst preparing to log, logging and rigging down, and the action
       on detecting flow from the well is as follows:

        Note: Be aware that during running in with wireline, a very slight flow may be observed, this being the
                  wireline displacement.

          (1)  Advise logging contractor personnel to stop the winch.

          (2) Open HCR valve.

          (3) Close annular preventer – advise Toolpusher/BP Rep, who will then evaluate (in consultation with
           Onshore Team if time permits), the appropriate course of action.

        Note:  This action will depend on a number of factors, eg rate of flow, pressures, logging tool position
                   in hole.

          (4)  Monitor well pressures and the closure effectiveness of the annular.

          (5) The decision may then be taken to use blind/shear rams in order to effect a well kill by bullheading
               (or to seal the wellbore).

        Note:  (1)  Should  it be necessary to close the blind/shear rams on the wire then,  if possible, an
                     attempt must be made to cut the wire to allow  it to fall downhole prior to closing in the
                      blind/shear rams. Again, there may be a scenario whereby the wire is being lifted out of
                     the hole, in which case immediate closure of the blind/shear rams is required.  It is the
                        responsibility of the BP Rep to make this decision.

                  (2)   Prior to making any cut on the wire, ensure that the wire above the cut is clamped and tied
                           off to avoid snaking of the surface after being cut.

                  (3)   All key personnel are to be made aware of the procedures and duties are to be assigned.

  3.    FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS

          (1) A formal procedure of the above is to be made and posted on the rig.

          (2) Ensure that a risk assessment is carried out in relation to the above as it may capture some items
               that have been missed.

          (3) Ensure that the logging contractor is included in any assessments and that he is happy with the
             procedure.


