

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 2 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  0410/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  0 (7/90)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  1 of 2

SUBJECT: SHALLOW GAS PROCEDURES

1.1   When the shallow seismic survey over a well location indicates the presence of seismic anomalies, and
              it is not practical to re-site the rig position, then the following procedures MUST BE FOLLOWED.

1.2   A 12 1/4” pilot hole will be drilled in open water to below the lowermost anomaly (refer to Section
       1060/EXP).

      Note:
      Anomalieswillbepenetratedonlyduringthehoursofdaylightandinreasonableweatherconditions.

1.3   The following shallow gas precautions will be taken in order to minimise the risk to the rig and
       personnel:

        1.  The rig will be moored up with enough chain left in the lockers to enable the rig to move 150 metres
               off location. The anchor winch operation must be checked prior to drilling the anomaly.

             In water depths of less than 100 metres, consideration will be given to attaching a supply boat to
            the rig; the requirement will be discussed and agreed with the Marine Superintendent.

        2.  One vessel capable of towing should remain on location.

        3.  A watch will be kept at the moonpool to observe for gas breaking out of the sea under the rig. The
          watch keeper should be provided with a radio with which to contact the control room and drillfloor.

         The 12 1/4” pilot hole will be drilled with the ROV in attendance to observe any gas breaking out at
            the seabed.

        4.  The weather conditions and tidal state will be monitored at all times and a preferred direction for
          moving the rig off location determined.

        5.  A minimum volume of 400 bbls of 1.3 SG kill mud will be available to pump in the event that it is
           necessary to attempt to dynamically kill a gas flow.

        6.  A safety meeting will be held prior to spudding the pilot hole.  All gas detectors and alarms will be
             tested.  All hot work permits are to be withdrawn.  All bulk lines and salt water supply lines must be
          checked and the mud and cementing systems pressure tested.

        7.  The 12 1/4” pilot hole will be drilled with seawater and viscous slugs.

        A float without bleed hole will be included in the drilling assembly.

          Rates of penetration will be restricted to 8 metres/hour from within 15 metres of the anticipated top
            of an anomaly. Once the anomaly has been penetrated the ROP may be increased at the
             discretion of the Drilling Superintendent.

             Circulation rate should be high, of the order of 800 gallons/minute.

        8.  At total depth the hole will be circulated clean and displaced to seawater. The pumps will be shut
         down and the hole observed for flow.

        9.    If no flow is observed then the pilot hole should be displaced to 1.3 SG mud prior to continuing with
            operations on the well.

       10. In the event that a shallow gas flow does occur, either after displacement to seawater or during
               drilling, then circulate at maximum flowrates with seawater whilst allowing the accumulation to
            deplete.

                   If unable to control the depletion, then pump the 1.3 SG kill mud. The kill mud must be pumped at
          as high a rate as possible to dynamically kill the flow.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 2 از 2 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  0410/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  0 (7/90)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  2 of 2

SUBJECT: SHALLOW GAS PROCEDURES

       11. During any trips the drillstring should be pumped out of the hole.  Every effort must be made to
           prevent a gas influx through swabbing.

             In the event that a shallow gas flow does occur whilst tripping, then the appropriate procedure will
          depend on the depth out of hole and the rate of flow.  If possible, run back in the hole to bottom and
         pump the 1.3 SG kill mud at as high a rate as possible in an attempt to dynamically kill the flow.

       12.  If at any time the gas flow is so severe as to threaten the safety of the rig, then the rig should be
         moved off location in such a direction as to take the rig out of any gas plume in the water and so
             that the wind will carry gas away from the rig.


