

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 1 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  0413/SEM

                                                                  Rev.         :  0 (3/91)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  1 of 1

SUBJECT: SHALLOW GAS PROCEDURES (DEEPWATER IN DP MODE)

1.1   When a shallow seismic survey has not been carried out over a deepwater (> 300m) well location with a
         rig operating in DP mode, then the following procedures MUST BE FOLLOWED.

1.2   A 12 1/4” pilot hole will be drilled in open water to below the surface casing shoe depth.

1.3   The following shallow gas precautions will be taken in order to minimise the risk to the rig and
       personnel:

        1.  The 12 1/4” pilot hole will be drilled with the ROV in attendance to observe any gas breaking out at
            the seabed.

        2.  The weather conditions and tidal state will be monitored at all times and a preferred direction for
          moving the rig off location determined.

        3.  A minimum volume of 400 bbls of 1.3 SG kill mud will be available to pump in the event that it is
           necessary to attempt to dynamically kill a gas flow.

        4.  A safety meeting will be held prior to spudding the pilot hole.  All gas detectors and alarms will be
             tested.  All hot work permits are to be withdrawn.  All bulk lines and salt water supply lines must be
          checked and the mud and cementing systems pressure tested.

        5.  The 12 1/4” pilot hole will be drilled with seawater and viscous slugs.

        A float without bleed hole will be included in the drilling assembly.

             Circulation rate should be high, of the order of 800 gallons/minute.

        6.  At total depth the hole will be circulated clean and displaced to seawater. The pumps will be shut
         down and the hole observed for flow.

        7.    If no flow is observed then the pilot hole should be displaced to 1.3 SG mud prior to continuing with
            operations on the well.

        8.   In the event that a shallow gas flow does occur, either after displacement to seawater or during
               drilling, then circulate at maximum flowrates with seawater whilst allowing the accumulation to
            deplete.

                   If unable to control the depletion, then pump the 1.3 SG kill mud. The kill mud must be pumped at
          as high a rate as possible to dynamically kill the flow.

        9.  During any trips the drillstring should be pumped out of the hole.  Every effort must be made to
           prevent a gas influx through swabbing.

             In the event that a shallow gas flow does occur whilst tripping, then the appropriate procedure will
          depend on the depth out of hole and the rate of flow.  If possible, run back in the hole to bottom and
         pump the 1.3 SG kill mud at as high a rate as possible in an attempt to dynamically kill the flow.

       10.  If at any time the gas flow is so severe as to threaten the safety of the rig, then the rig should be
         moved off location in such a direction as to position the rig upwind and clear of any gas breaking
             free at sea level.


