

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 1 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  0415/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  0 (8/90)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  1 of 1

SUBJECT: THE EFFECT OF COLD WEATHER ON BOP STACKS AND CONTROL LINES

1.    GENERAL

1.1     In extremely cold weather conditions, it is possible that BOP control lines, choke and kill lines or cooling
      systems may become frozen. The lowest ambient temperature in the UK North Sea is -10 Celcius.

1.2   When BOP control lines freeze, it is because the fluid in the lines contains insufficient glycol to protect it
       against ambient temperatures.

1.3    Only fluid in the 1” line on subsea BOP stack systems can be displaced simply by cycling the functions.
      The fluid in control lines on surface stacks and pilot lines can only be displaced if the lines are broken at
       the stack or pod.

1.4   To ensure that the pilot lines contain glycol treated fluid, whenever the ambient temperature falls below
       freezing point, the pilot accumulator must be fed from a dedicated reservoir in which the glycol
       concentration is maintained throughout the year.   If this is not possible, then the required glycol
       concentration should be maintained in the whole reservoir.

1.5   To ensure the correct additive concentration, the constituents should be mixed in a separate tank. The
         fluid in the reservoir should be agitated to prevent glycol settling out and the concentrations periodically
       checked.

1.6    The possibility of glycol settling out within the pilot lines with time must be investigated.

1.7    Suitable precautions should be taken to prevent damage to cooling systems when equipment is shut
      down in cold weather.

1.8     Significant ice and snow accretions are rare, however any accumulation should be monitored to ensure
       the vessel’s design criteria are not breached.

1.9    Hydraulic equipment in storage may be vulnerable if it is not fully drained or filled with a suitable fluid.

2.    POLICY

      The following is mandatory on all BP operated rigs on the UKCS unless written dispensation is obtained
       from the Drilling Operations Manager (Dyce).

        1)  Mud shall be retained in the choke and kill lines and circulated every shift.  If a water based mud is
              in use, the salinity shall be controlled to prevent freezing under prevailing conditions.  If the rig is in
          deep water or using high mud weights, consideration should be given to displacing the choke and
                  kill lines to water containing an anti-freeze agent.

        2)  Control fluid in subsea BOP pilot lines shall be protected against freezing above -10 Celsius
           throughout the year.

        3)  Operating fluid in surface and subsea BOP lines shall be protected against freezing above -10
            Celsius during the period 1st November - 30th April.

        4)    If water based control fluid is used, the glycol concentration shall be confirmed by means of a
           hydrometer or refractometer each time the pilot lines are flushed through and once per day during
            the period 1st November - 30th April.


