

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 3 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  0420/SEM

                                                                  Rev.         :  0 (7/90)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  1 of 3

SUBJECT: SUBSEA BOP TESTING - GENERAL

1.    GENERAL

1.1    Refer to the BPX General Drilling Policy Document.

1.2     All wellhead BOP’s, valves, failsafes and risers shall be pressure tested from the direction they would
      be exposed to well pressure.

1.3    Each rig is required to have a detailed pressure testing procedure which complies with BPPD Standard
        Health, Safety and Environment Regulations.

1.4   No personnel are to be in the vicinity of pressure testing operations or equipment.  Notices should be
       posted and an announcement made on the public address system to warn all personnel of the test.

1.5   When test plugs are landed off in the wellhead, confirm the hang-off depth before commencing the test.

1.6    Record the volume of fluid pumped for each test, the closing/opening times of all functions and
       accumulator volume pumped for all BOP functions.

1.7     After a BOP test is complete, function test the remote operating panel(s). Do not allow preventers to
       close fully.

1.8     After each BOP test all rams are to be opened and the valves on the standpipe manifold and choke
       manifold set in the required positions for the next operation.

1.9    The Drilling Supervisor will witness the integrity of the tests and operation of all equipment.

2.    TEST PRESSURES

2.1     All well control equipment, except annular BOP’s and blind/shear rams is to be pressure tested to the
       lowest of the following criteria:

        a)  Maximum anticipated wellhead pressure, based on the casing design data included in the drilling
          programme.

        b)  80% of casing burst pressure.

        c)  Wellhead rated working pressure.

        d)  BOP rated working pressure.

      N.B.
      Equipmentnotindirectcontactwiththewellmaybetestedtoitsratedworkingpressureifrequired.

2.2    The annular preventer must only be closed when pipe is in the hole and must never be tested to more
       than 70% of the manufacturer’s rated working pressure during routine testing.

2.3    Blind/shear rams need only be pressure tested during casing pressure tests after installation of the
     BOP stack on the wellhead.

2.4       If a retrievable packer is set to test the BOP’s, the test pressure must not exceed 80% of casing burst
       pressure.

3.    FREQUENCY AND TEST DURATIONS

3.1    The BOP test frequency will be:

        a)   Prior to installation of the BOP stack, on the test stump.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 2 از 3 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  0420/SEM

                                                                  Rev.         :  0 (7/90)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  2 of 3

SUBJECT: SUBSEA BOP TESTING - GENERAL

        b)   After installation of the BOP stack on the wellhead.

        c)  Every 14 days thereafter.

        d)  Following any BOP repair.

3.2    Each test shall consist of two parts:

        a)  A 5 minute, 300 psi low pressure test.

        b)  A 10 minute, rated pressure test.

4.    TEST PROCEDURES

4.1   Where possible all tests are to be done with clean water. When displacing BOP and manifolds from
     mud to water, the minimum amounts must be used to minimise contamination and losses.

4.2    Before filling the stack with water or installing pipe through rams, perform a full function test. (Do not
       allow rams or annular to close fully.)

4.3    Before the test can begin, the test line must be pressure tested to the highest planned pressure of the
     BOP test.

4.4   When testing with plug type testers, any valves or kelly cocks run below test plugs must previously have
      been tested and run closed.

4.5    Whenever possible, routine testing is to be carried out with tools in the casing, and not when out of the
        hole.

4.6   Once the BOP is landed and latched, conduct an overpull test to 30,000 lbs.  Using the test plug,
       pressure test the connector and one set of 5” pipe rams to the maximum test pressure that will be
       experienced by that connector during all subsequent operations. This pressure will be specified in the
       data sheet for the well in question.

      Note:

      a)  Untiltheintegrityoftheconnectorsealisestablished,pressuretestingvolumesshouldbekepttoa
         minimumtoreducetheriskofwashingoutBOP/wellheadconnectors.

      b) TheconnectorshouldbemonitoredusingtheROV/SSTVduringtheinitialinstallationtest. Ifaleak
          isdetectedpumpingmustceaseimmediately.

4.7   Once the BOP stack is landed and the connector seal confirmed, a full stack test will be performed.

4.8   When various ram sizes are installed, only the rams that may be required in the current hole section
      need to be pressure tested during routine tests.

4.9   When operations permit all rams should be function tested in rotation and the operating volumes
       recorded.

4.10  When performing fortnightly routine BOP tests, the control pods must be alternated with each test.

4.11   Test pressures are to be built-up in increments and stabilised at each stage prior to reaching the
       required test pressure.

      Note:
     TheBOPmustbeobservedwiththeROV/SSTVandthetestpluglandingstringfilledandmonitoredfor
       leaks.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 3 از 3 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  0420/SEM

                                                                  Rev.         :  0 (7/90)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  3 of 3

SUBJECT: SUBSEA BOP TESTING - GENERAL

4.12    All high pressure connections associated with the well control equipment are to be pressure tested
      upon the installation or re-installation of each connection.

4.13    All test pressures will be specified on the data sheets.

5.    TEST EQUIPMENT

5.1    Refer to manufacturers’ specifications for BOP operating pressures.

5.2   Two separate gauges, showing the test pressure, must be visible from the test pump to prevent
       overpressuring due to gauge failure or inaccuracy.

5.3    The condition of all sealing faces of BOP test plugs must be checked before and after they are run.

5.4    Ensure all drillpipe used for testing is in good condition, smooth and is of the correct weight and grade
        to take the pressure testing loads.

5.5     All temporary high pressure lines must be fitted with cross coupling restraints.


