

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 1 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  1010/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  0 (9/90)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  1 of 1

SUBJECT:  DEPTH REFERENCING

1.    DETERMINATION OF ROTARY TABLE TO SEABED ELEVATION

1.1    Accurate measurement of rotary table to seabed is necessary to establish a datum point.

1.2   Make up spud-in assembly and run in strapping the pipe. Perform a penetration test with 20,000 lbs
        weight. Record the distance between seabed and rotary table corrected to MEAN SEA LEVEL using
       the CURRENT tide tables issued from Drilling Office, Aberdeen. Record the drilling draft, water depth
      and mean sea level to rotary table elevation.

      Jump the ROV to confirm measurements.

1.3       If the current is strong, particularly in deep water,  it will be necessary to wait on slack tide before
       confirming rotary table to seabed elevation. Extra drill collars may be required to overcome the effects
        of string bending caused by current action.

1.4   The bottom of the permanent guide base is run and cemented 1.0 metre from the seabed. Once
        established, the top of the 18 3/4” wellhead becomes the well reference point.

1.5   Once the permanent guide base is established and the guide wires are in use, paint a mark on each
       wire relative to a fixed point in the moonpool. Any change in the difference between the painted mark
      and the relative point can be used for depth correction to compensate for vessel draft and tide changes.

2.    DEPTH REFERENCING DURING DRILLING OPERATIONS

2.1   On semi-submersible units, land off the BOP stack and riser equipment. Run the BOP test plug
      assembly using a painted single to confirm ram spacings. This measurement is used to determine the
       space-out for the emergency hang-off tool.

2.2   On semi-submersible units, when running equipment which lands off in a specific position inside the
       wellhead, e.g. wear bushing, pack-off, test plug, etc., always use a painted single to confirm correct
        land-off.


