

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 1 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  1060/SEM

                                                                  Rev.         :  0 (7/90)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  1 of 1

SUBJECT: WELL ESTABLISHMENT - RUNNING TGB

1.0   A Temporary Guide Base (TGB) will normally only be run in deep water.

1.1     Prior to moving the rig onto location site survey results will be available giving information on possible
      anchoringconditions,seabedslope and the generalnatureoftheseabed to a depth of 30m.

      The rig will normally be positioned at a location where the seabed is clear of obvious debris and has a
       slope less than 1 degree.

1.2   The standard equipment is a Temporary Guide Base with J-slot running preparation. The base will
      have the following additional features:

          •   Eye hooks to allow guideline replacement with ROV.

          •   Holes drilled in 4 faces for the attachment of ballast box extensions if required.

          •   Two base plates for mounting bullseyes.

          •   Base plate for sonar beacon.

          •    7” OD guide for remedial annular cementation.

1.3    The TGB should be positioned on the moveable beams on the cellar deck while under tow or running
       anchors and the guidelines worked.

1.4    Attach the four guidelines with shackles ensuring the pins are wired secure. Paint the guidelines at 1m
        intervals for the first 4m above the TGB. This will assist in determining the proximity of the TGB when
       running BHA’s.

1.5       If required attach the 4 ballast box extensions. Attach 2 bullseyes.

1.6    The TGB must be additionally loaded to allow working tension of about 6000 lbs on each guidewire
       while running the spud assembly and a minimum seabed loading of about 6000 lbs to prevent the TGB
          lifting as the guidewires compensate.

1.7   Make up the J slot running tool to the TGB and to the drillpipe running string. Incorporate bumper subs
         in the string as required by rig heave. In deep water consideration should be given to tensile loads and
        to using a shrouded bumper sub to minimise the risk of bumper sub failure.

1.8    Lower the TGB to seabed maintaining slight tension on the guidewires to avoid fouling. Mark the
         drillstring while running to ensure that it does not rotate while making connections. Confirm orientation
        with ROV compass/gyro.

1.9    Prior to landing the TGB, launch the ROV to check that the seabed is clear of obstruction.
        (Alternatively, run the rigs SSTV camera.)  If any obstruction is seen, move the rig as necessary on the
       anchors to avoid it.

1.10   Land the base on seabed and allow the bumper sub to be partly closed to afford heave compensation.
      Check the slope indicator (bullseye) readings - the maximum acceptable angle is 2 degrees.  For
        larger angles the guidebase should be picked up and repositioned.

1.11   Mark the four guidelines in a horizontal plane above the cellar deck using a permanent fixture as a
        reference. Indications of the guidebase tilting or settling can then be observed immediately.

1.12   Release the R. tool from the TGB (chain tong) taking care not to rotate the base. Adjust the guideline
       tensions to give about 1500 lbs tension above guideline buoyed weight.  Retrieve the running tool.
      Ensure that the landing string is not rotated to avoid whipping action.


