

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 3 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  1130/FIX

                                                                  Rev.         :  1 (12/89)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  1 of 3

SUBJECT: CONDUCTOR INSTALLATION - DRILL/DRIVE

1.    INTRODUCTION

         Drill/Drive is the least common of the conductor installation techniques in use in BP Platform Drilling
       Operations. The technique has application in variable seabed conditions of alternating hard and soft
       bands, where driving would not suffice but drilling/cementing are not favoured due towashout problems.

      The conductor is run to the seabed as per Section 1110/PLA.

     A pilot hole is then drilled through the conductor. The conductor is piled into this pilot hole and the
       procedure repeated as necessary to achieve conductor setting depth.

       This General Procedure is based on 27” diameter 1 1/4” wall conductor, with 24” pilot hole. Wide
        variations are possible, including initial piling followed by drilling.

         Drill/Drive Conductor Operations, due to the large quantity of Pile Driving Equipment involved, tend to
      be done in batches.

2.    CONDUCTOR STRING AND INSTALLATION

      The conductor is the first string of pipe to connect the surface diverter equipment to the production well
       being drilled and is installed to such a depth below seabed that  it provides a positive foundation to
       which all surface wellhead and BOP equipment is attached.

      The conductor is 27” outside diameter, 1 1/4” wall thickness, grade X-52 pipe supplied in 40 ft lengths
       connected together using Vetco SR-20 connectors which are welded to the ends of each length of pipe.

      Each connector located above seabed level is protected against water ingress by the installation of a
        protective sleeve.  All conductor pipe above the seabed level is also protected with coal tar epoxy paint.

       Options exist of installing the conductor strings by the “Drill/Drive” technique which entails establishing
      an initial penetration in the seabed by piling, drilling a 24” hole beneath the conductor shoe to a depth
         just short of the TD, running the conductor to the bottom of the predrilled hole and then piling to final TD
        to secure a firm foundation for the conductors.

        Alternatively, conductors can be installed by a modified procedure which is designed to avoid lost
        circulation problems if encountered and to minimise hammer handling time. Thus, the conductor string
         is run until the seabed is tagged whereupon the conductor is pulled back approximately 2 metres and
      hung off in slips on the BOP deck. A 12 1/4” hole is drilled directionally to 3 metres short of TD. Then
       the hole is opened out to 24” using a 24” hole opener assembly.  Finally, the conductor is run to bottom
      and driven to refusal to establish a final TD.

      The depths of the shoes of adjacent conductors are usually staggered to prevent possible washout
       problems during drilling of the next hole selection, and to optimise directional requirements.

      The sequence of installation can be arranged to that where possible adjacent conductors are installed
        with sufficient time between installations to allow formations affected by constant piling to “firm up” and
       thereby ease condition of the hole during the drilling phase.

3.    INSTALLATION PROCEDURE (TYPICAL)

3.1    Prepare the shoe joint (cut bevel as required).

3.2    Lay shoe joint in V-door, pin up. (The first 10 joints run in each string including the shoe joint should be
       unpainted joints.)

3.3    Pick up shoe joint on handling tool using drawworks.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 2 از 3 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  1130/FIX

                                                                  Rev.         :  1 (12/89)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  2 of 3

SUBJECT: CONDUCTOR INSTALLATION - DRILL/DRIVE

3.4    Set shoe joint in slips in rotary table. Install safety clamp and remove handling tool.

3.5    Using second handling tool, pick up next joint with drawworks, and make up to shoe joint using power
       clamp.

3.6    Pick up the string and run down to set slips below top pin. Ensure shoe goes through power slips on
     BOP deck. Install safety clamp.

3.7    Repeat steps 3.3 - 3.6 until the seabed has been tagged (approximately 9 joints). Run final joint on
         drillpipe and handling tool to avoid problems of having to break out connector. Pull back some 2 metres
      and hang the conductor string off in the slips on the BOP deck. Attach safety clamp.

3.8    Lay down handling tool.

3.9    Pick up the 12 1/4” pilot hole drilling assembly and RIH.

3.10  Run in to seabed and drill the 12 1/4” hole to 3 metres short of planned shoe TD.  Close control
        directional drilling may be required to ensure optimum conductor orientation.  Circulate high viscosity
          pills as required to ensure proper hole cleaning.

         Drilling parameters will be dictated by directional drilling constraints.  In particular, flowrates must be
       kept to a minimum in order to avoid eroding the hole.

3.11   Circulate the hole clean and POOH.  Lay back the pilot hole BHA and pick up the 24” hole opening
       assembly. RIH and open the hole to TD (refer to Section 1280/GEN). A minimum bullnose length of
     2m is required to ensure correct tracking of the hole opener in the pilot hole.

3.12   Circulate hole clean, spot viscous mud in open hole. POOH.

3.13   Pick up hammer and short chaser joint.

3.14   Pull back conductor from BOP deck to rotary. Watch slips on BOP deck and watch connectors for
       hang-ups.

3.15   Pick up and connect two conductor joints at the drill floor using handling tool below hammer/chaser.

3.16   Release handling tool from top of conductor joint. Lay down handling tool using the attached tugger.

3.17   Lower hammer/chaser joint assembly until chaser is engaged in the top of the conductor. Make up the
       chaser joint to the conductor pin as for the handling tool.

3.18   Pick up the string from the slips, remove safety clamp. Lower the string. Ensure spider slips on the
     BOP deck are locked open.

3.19   Continue lowering/driving the conductor monitoring blow count at all times.  It is predicted that the blow
       count may increase typically by 5 blow/ft per 10m increment of depth shallow, to 90 blows/ft at depth.

3.20     If the conductor can be driven to the bottom of the pilot hole with less than 190 blows/ft,  it should be
       driven into virgin formation a minimum of 3m of until a blow count of approximately 250 blows/ft is
       reached.

3.21   Should the blow count rise significantly above 250 blows/ft prior to penetrating virgin formation by 3m,
       then a further clean-out trip may be needed with the 24” bit after releasing chaser joint from conductor
      and setting conductor in slips on the BOP deck.

3.22   Conductor is to be cut off a set height above the cellar deck. The cut-off joints are to be retrieved and
         laid out.

3.23  A clean-out trip should be made to the shoe.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 3 از 3 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  1130/FIX

                                                                  Rev.         :  1 (12/89)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  3 of 3

SUBJECT: CONDUCTOR INSTALLATION - DRILL/DRIVE

3.24   After the conductor strings have been run and cleaned out, they are to be surveyed as per Standard
       Surveying Instructions.

The following BHA’s are recommended during the drilling phase:

1.       Pilot Hole

      12 1/4” sealed bearing bit (no jets)

      7 5/8” turbine c/w float

      1 1/2° bent sub

     UBHO sub

        8” DC’s

2.     Hole Opening Assembly

        8” bullnose

       Short DC, minimum length 8 feet

       24” hole opener

       24” stabiliser

      2 x 8” DC’s

       24” stabiliser


