

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 1 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  1280/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  0 (8/90)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  1 of 1

SUBJECT:  UNDERREAMING IN TOP HOLE

1.    The following practices should be adopted when underreaming large top hole sections:

1.1   When underreaming with roller bearing cutters and controlled drilling or WOB cannot be maintained,
       reduce the RPM to between 50 - 80. This should avoid premature gauge wear on cutter cones and arm
         shirtails which could result in the loss of cones in a short period of time.

1.2       If the underreamer arms will not close due to drilled debris blocking the arm pockets, pump at the
       highest rate possible and at the same time rotate at high RPM.  It may be possible to “bounce” the drill
        string off bottom to loosen the material.

1.3   Where very fast underreaming is possible, ensure enough RPM is used to prevent cutting a spiral hole -
        at least 100 RPM is recommended.

1.4   When hole opening, the use of an expanding blade stabiliser may assist in maintaining vertical hole.
       Placing a stabilised pilot hole assembly below the underreamer may not guarantee vertical hole.

1.5   On making the initial underreamerr cut, rotate for at least 5 - 15 minutes at a reduced rate of 30 - 40
     RPM and at full pump rate, prior to attempting to drill ahead. This should allow sufficient time for a full
      gauge initial cut to be made. The harder the formation, the longer the time required before drilling
       ahead.

1.6     After having underreamed about 3m, stop rotating, pick up the string with the pump still on, and lower
       the string attempting to tag the ledge that should have been cut.  If the formation is firm enough and has
       not washed out, this will give an indication that the hole is being cut.   If the formation is very soft or
       badly washed out, this procedure will not work.


