

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 2 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  2100/JAK

                                                                   Rev.         :  0 (7/90)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  1 of 2

SUBJECT:  PREPARATION & RUNNING 30" CONDUCTOR & STAB-IN CEMENT
         STINGER ASSEMBLY

 1.    SPACE-OUT AND RUNNING ORDER

 1.1    Normally 30” conductor will be run to approximately 60m (five joints) below seabed.

       The conductor should be spaced out to place the top of the Dril-Quip Quick Jay Box at 1 (one) metre
       above the seabed. This depth will be the definitive depth for the conductor space-out.

       The mudline hanger suspension ring joint should be located one full joint below the seabed.  This will
        allow further casing strings to be backed out of their mudline hangers during abandonment/suspension,
        avoiding casing cutting, but still complying with DEn depth restrictions above seabed.

 1.2    The following running order should be used for 1” wall conductor:

        30” OD x 1” WT shoe joint w/stab-in float shoe x Lynx SA pin up.

       2 x 30” OD x 1” WT conductor joint w/Lynx SA box down x Lynx SA pin up.

       (Numbers may vary depending on programmed 30” shoe depth.)

        30” OD x 1” WT MLH suspension ring joint w/Lynx SA box down x Lynx SA pin up.

        30” OD x 1” WT crossover joint w/Lynx SA box down x Quick Jay box up.

        30” OD x 1” WT landing joint w/Quick Jay pin down x Lynx SA pin up.

        30” OD x 1” WT conductor joints w/Lynx SA box down x Lynx SA pin up. (Numbers to suit water depth).

 2.    PREPARATION

 2.1    Inspect all lip and “O” ring seals and seal areas on the Lynx SA and Quick Jay connectors.  If there is
       any doubt as to the integrity of the seals, remove and discard them. Clean the seal housing and seal
        face using a steam gun, high pressure water gun or degreasing agent. Ensure seal housings are dry
       and free from degreasing agent before installing new seals. A light coating of grease on the seals will
         assist in installation.

         Lightly grease seal and seal areas.

       Note that 2 “O” ring seals should be installed on the Quick Jay pin.

       Note:
         If for any reason the 30” conductor needs to be retrieved, then all seals should again be inspected and
       replaced if required. Ensure adequate spare seals are on board to re-run the conductor assuming all
       sealswouldneedtobereplaced.

 2.2     All Lynx SA connectors (as a minimum those above the Quick Jay connector) should have anti-rotation
        dowells in the box and corresponding slots in the pin to allow for disconnection at the Quick Jay box.

 2.3    Check ID’s of the mudline hanger suspension rings to ensure a 26” bit can pass.

        Accurately measure the distance from the top shoulder of the mudline hanger suspension ring to the
       shoulder of the Lynx SA pin above.  This measurement will be required for subsequent
        wellhead/mudline hanger space-out calculations.

 2.4    Ensure that no connections coincide with 30” cutting depths for the jack-up, both for installation of the
         diverter system or subsequent cut for installation of starter wellhead on first casing string.

 2.5    Check the 30” stab-in float shoe and if appropriate the installation of the debris plug.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 2 از 2 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  2100/JAK

                                                                   Rev.         :  0 (7/90)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  2 of 2

SUBJECT:  PREPARATION & RUNNING 30" CONDUCTOR & STAB-IN CEMENT
         STINGER ASSEMBLY

       Ensure that the stab-in stinger is compatible with the 30” stab-in guide shoe and seals are in good
         condition (spare seals should be on board, if required).

 3.    RUNNING CONDUCTOR

 3.1   Run conductor in correct order as indicated above.

 3.2      Fill the conductor to sea level with seawater after running each joint.

 3.3   When making up the Quick Jay connector, install locking wedge and attach a cable to be run back to
         surface. (Once the 30” is landed this cable should finally be secured below the rig floor until required
      when suspending the well.)

 3.4    Ensure ROV or divers are deployed to monitor and assist stabbing of the guide shoe into the 36” hole.

       Note:

      a) Whenever possible a large ROV capable of nudging the conductor should be available so that
           stabbingofthe30”intothe36”holeislessdependentonslackwater.

      b)  Itisnormaltousediversinwaterdepthsof50morless.

 3.5   Run the conductor to the required depth (top of Quick Jay box, 1m above seabed) and confirm position
       above seabed with ROV or divers. Land conductor in slips.

 3.6       If necessary cut conductor so that stick-up is +/- 1m above rig floor and cut eyes to allow slings to be
        attached.

 3.7   Make up stab-in stinger to first joint of drillpipe and install 5”/30” balloon centraliser 1m above the stab-
          in sub. Run first joint into conductor.

 3.8    Rig up and run remainder of drillpipe cement stinger assembly.

              If there is no latch mechanism on the stab-in stinger, it may be necessary to use HWDP for the cement
         stinger to ensure the cement stinger assembly cannot be pumped out of the float shoe.

       The preferred method is to use a 30” spider adapter plate w/bowl and slips.  Alternatively a “C” plate
        w/double elevators can be used.

 3.9    Refer to Section 3100/FIX for details of stabbing in, circulating and cementing.

 3.10   Pull drillpipe cement stinger assembly and rig down elevators.

 3.11   Pick up the 30” conductor only enough to recover the 30” slips and hold in place until surface samples
       have set.  (If the conductor was cut above the rig floor, then slings will be required to lift the conductor.)


