

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 4 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  3010/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (8/91)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  1 of 4

SUBJECT:  CEMENTING: RESPONSIBILITIES

1.1     Drilling Contractor

      The drilling contractor is responsible for operating and in some cases maintaining the bulk supply and
       mixing systems. He is also responsible for providing personnel for loading and backloading of supplies
      and equipment. He will assist with sampling prior to and during the cement job.

      The following minimum checks and procedures are to be performed:

            i)     Air up all tanks the day before the cement job, check for leaks. Carry out repairs immediately.

             ii)    Pressure test and physically check all air supply lines and valves in the bulk system.

              iii)    Start up and check compressors, check alternative air supply is available immediately the primary
           system fails.

          iv)   Ensure surge tank is clean internally, all valves and vents working.

        v)   Blow through all lines. Ensure dry air is vented and lines are clear.

          vi)    Prior to filling the pods from the supply boat, ensure all lines from the boat to pods are blown
            through until dry air is vented.

          Note:
              If at any time damp air is found venting, either from the supply boat of on the pre-cementing
            inspectionthecausemustbeestablishedandcorrectiveactiontaken.

           vii)  Time the surge tank filling rate. Compare with previous filling rates and normal mixing rates.

           viii)  Ensure air pressure can be adequately maintained.

          ix)   Prior to filling storage pods from the supply boats, open the pod and physically check for
             debris/rocks etc.

        x)   Sign a check list when all the above inspections have been completed.

          xi)   Purge all lines immediately upon completion of a cement job until dry air is vented.

1.2    Offshore Cement Operator

       Photostat this Section 1.2 - cementer to check each item and sign off pages checked. Return to Drilling
       Supervisor/Engineer signed and dated pages.

        a)  The cement operator’s duties are:

                   i)    Maintain and operate the cementing installation and all associated equipment on the rig to
                 the highest standards of reliability, and ensure that the unit has valid certification, including
                    certification for any densitometer with a radio-active source.

                     ii)   Record stock levels of cement and additives and maintain quality control and physically
               check all stocks on a weekly basis and prior to any cementing operation.  Liquid additives
           MUST be checked by use of a hydrometer. Maintain adequate spare parts and consumables
                   to support the offshore operations. Maintain a log book of all materials used and delivered.

                     iii)   Carry out individual cement calculations and verify calculations performed by the wellsite
                      drilling engineer and the Drilling Supervisor.

               iv)   Perform the cement job as per the programme specified by the company, including the use of
                    liquid additive dispensing units and data recording devices.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 2 از 4 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  3010/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (8/91)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  2 of 4

SUBJECT:  CEMENTING: RESPONSIBILITIES

             v)   Obtain representative samples of cements and additives and forward these in good time for
                  laboratory testing, properly packaged.

               vi)   Check the cement unit and equipment and ensure the following:

                  Unit and lines are pressure tested to minimum 1000 psi above casing test pressure using a
                  chart recorder.

                  Unit displacement tank barrel scale is accurate.

                Displacement tank valves do not leak, and are easily operable.

             Low pressure mixing system is flushed through.

                Packings on mix pumps are operable.

                Pressure on mix pumps is more than adequate for mixing.

                 Jets in mixer are correct.

                Packings on HP pumps are operable.

               High pressure mixing system is flushed through.

                 Correct jets are available for high pressure mixing.

               Bypass valve on mix manifold is working.

               Bypass on mixer is open (manually).

               Engine oil and water are at correct levels.

                   Oil in pumps is at correct level.

              Hoses are serviceable.

               Hopper is serviceable.

              Cement head, i.e. valves, threads, indicators and plug locator pins are all operable.

                Liquid additive system pumps, lines, gauging rates are sufficient to meet mixing
                 requirements.

                  Physically check that the volumes of liquid additives are sufficient to provide 100% in excess
                   of job requirements.

              Water supply rate to displacement tanks or batch tank exceeds maximum estimated
                 requirement.

                Batch mixer is operating correctly.

                Operator is to sign a check list prior to casing being run confirming all checks satisfactorily
               completed.   If operator doubts the high pressure mixing system he should mix 50 sks
                overboard to prove the system.

1.3    Offshore Drilling Engineer (if present)

            i)    Ensure cement, additive and mixwater samples are sent in correctly marked and packaged.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 3 از 4 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  3010/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (8/91)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  3 of 4

SUBJECT:  CEMENTING: RESPONSIBILITIES

             ii)    Collect samples during the cement job.

              iii)   Confirm stock levels of cement and additives;  must carry out a physical check on stock.
          Minimum level is for 2 jobs.

          iv)   Collate downhole temperature data as a check on cement slurry design. Compare to test
             temperature.

        v)   Witness and check quality control of caliper logs.

          vi)   Compute slurry volumes from caliper.

           vii)   Prepare individual calculations for the cement job. Compare results with the separate calculations
              carried out by the Drilling Supervisor and cementer.

           viii)  Verify and monitor mixwater volumes, displacement volumes and pressure during the cement job.

          ix)   Supervise preparation of spacers, cement and additives.  Ensure cement is fluffed as per
          recommended procedure.

        x)   Prepare all cementation reports.

1.4    Operations Drilling Engineer (Onshore)

            i)    Ensure cement, mixwater and additive samples are dispatched in good time to the service
          company for testing.

             ii)    Verify the cementing telex is correct and meets the requirement of the planned cementing
             operation.

              iii)   Ensure the cementing telex is forwarded to the installation in good time for the operation.

1.5     Drilling Supervisor

            i)    Inform the Mud Loggers and Driller of:

             a)  The volume of each type of mix water to be used for both lead and tail cement jobs.

             b)  From which mud pit each type of mix water will be drawn.

              c)  The expected gain, per barrel of mix water blended with cement, for both lead and tail
                    slurries.

             d)  The expected total volume of returns during the cement job and the expected overall increase
                    in pit volume.

             ii)    Supervise the DE, cementers and drilling contractor in the performance of their duties.

              iii)   Prepare individual calculations for the cement job.

          iv)   Approve all reports, worksheets and job tickets.

        v)    Co-ordinate the execution of the cement job. Ensure that all relevant personnel are issued with a
             detailed programme of the cement job, highlighting individual responsibilities. The detailed
          programme must include volumes, pressures and pump rates for the cementing and displacing
             operations. Contingency plans must also be drawn up for any equipment failure etc. Procedures
           must be written to cover alternative mix water supply, rig pump failure, alternative mixwater and
            displacement valve measurement and procedures if predicted pressures are exceeded or return
           volumes insufficient to maintain displacement with mud.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 4 از 4 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  3010/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (8/91)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  4 of 4

SUBJECT:  CEMENTING: RESPONSIBILITIES

          Note:
          Ensure that the operation checklist is completed prior to all jobs. This is regardless of any
           separate checklists generated by the Cementing Company. The checklist should be retained in
           theoffshoreWellFile.

1.6   Mud Engineer and Mud Loggers

            i)   Mud Engineer is to check the mix-water for contamination.

             ii)   Mud Engineer is to ensure that a sufficient volume of mud is available on the surface prior to
          commencement of the cementation.

              iii)  Mud Loggers/Mud Engineers are to monitor pit volumes throughout the cementation.


