

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 2 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  3030/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  1 (11/89)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  1 of 2

SUBJECT:  CEMENTING: OPERATIONS CHECKLIST

1.     Both the Driller and the Mud Engineer are to prepare pit and flowlines for the expected total returns.

        1.  The system must be prepared to accept the totalvolumereturned (= bbls of slurry and spacers to
          be pumped) intoonepitonly.

        2.   Circulation system, including the sandtrap, should be complete and full of mud.

2.    The Driller and the Mud Loggers are to record the volumes in each individual pit and the total volume in
       the pits.

3.      After the mud pits have been prepared, no mud is to be transferred or dumped and no ballast
      controlmovementsaretotakeplace without prior permission from the BP Drilling Supervisor.

4.    The BP Supervisor/DE is to inform the Mud Loggers and the Driller at the start of mixing cement.

5.     Ensure the following samples are taken at regular intervals during the cement job in case of problems:

      Cement from Surge Tank           10 kg
       Actual Mix Water with Additives*      1 gal
      Water (Drill Water/Sea Water)        1 gal
        Individual Liquid Additives           500 ml
        Slurry Samples                      5-10 cups

      Check density of the liquid additives prior to use.

      Note:
      a) Mixwatersamplesshouldbecollectedatthebeginning,middleandendoftheleadandtailslurry.
      b)  Retaintheslurrysamplesforobservation.

6.    The BP Supervisor/DE is to inform the Mud Loggers and Driller when changing from the lead to the tail
      cement slurry and at the end of pumping cement.

7.     Maintain plot of displacement vs top of cement and also position of top plug. Compare theoretical and
        actual pressures.

      Note any losses during the cementation. Do not confuse U-tubing with losses. Record pressure prior
        to bumping the top plug and calculate theoretical top of cement.

8.    The BP Supervisor/DE is to inform both the Mud Loggers and the Driller periodically of the amounts of
       mix water used.

9.     Ensure cement operator changes displacement tanks correctly to minimise error in slurry or
       displacement volumes.

10.    Leave mixing tub full of the proper required cement slurry at the conclusion of mixing.  Avoid the
         possibility of pumping diluted cement or even water into casing before the top plug is released.

11.    Ascertain that the correct pit(s) have been lined up to the mudpumps and put a short pressure test on
       the cement head/valve after lining up to ensure the pump has suction.

12.     Physically ascertain the amount of fluid pumped from the pits, and check that the pits are dropping by
       the requisite amount during the displacement.

      The pump stroke counters will not be relied on as the only means of discerning the volume of
       displacement pumped.

13.       If more than one pit volume is required equalise across two pits and pump the displacement, if that is
       not possible then displace a volume from one pit, stop the pumps, line up to the second pit and
       complete the displacement.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 2 از 2 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  3030/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  1 (11/89)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  2 of 2

SUBJECT:  CEMENTING: OPERATIONS CHECKLIST

14.    Displace the cement with mud. Determine the displacement volume, pump strokes and pumping time
        at which the displacement rate should be reduced prior to bumping the plugs.  Displace cement at
     maximum rate allowable from pressure consideration unless advised otherwise.

15.    The active pit gain is to be monitored continuously during cementing. Expect additional return volumes
       during mixing and reduced return rates during initial displacing. Ensure any losses are noted.

16.    Displace from the cementing unit in the following cases:

        a)  When no rig pumps available.  Control volume by measuring from mud tanks as well as cement
             unit displacement tanks.

        b)  When placing cement plugs or cementing through drill pipe.

        c)   Liner cementations.

17.       If rig pump is used, have cementer’s pump unit ready to take over to bump the plugs in case the
       pressure becomes excessive. Record all mixing, displacing, bumping, opening/closing of D.V. collars,
        etc on pressure chart.

18.    The Mud Loggers/Driller are to record the total volume in the pits and inform the BP Supervisor/DE of
       the volume gained (or lost) during the entire cement job.

19.     After bumping top plug, release pressure, measure returns and check for backflow.

20.       If there is backflow, pump back the amountofbackflowonly and repressure the casing.  If there is still
       backflow, wait until the cement is hard before repeating the test.

21.    Pressure test casing immediately after bump (15 min API).

22.       If float equipment fails and/or pressure is held on the casing, a pressure gauge should be installed on
       the cement head so that the required pressure can be maintained and excessive pressure bled off
        periodically.  In this case the pressure left on must not exceed the observed differential pressure
      between mud and cement.

23.   On dual stage jobs, close the D.V. with a pump rate of 8 bbls/min and build up to a 1000 psi pressure
      above the total of opening pressure of the D.V. collar and the pressure differential of cement and mud.
      Keep the pump strokes constant until this closing pressure is reached.

     Mud inertia is used to close stage collar.

      Note:
     Whenfirststageisbumped,measuretheamountoffluidbledbacksoastohaveanideaoftheamount
      bledbackonthesecondstage. Thisisincasedifficultiesareexperienced.


