

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 5 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  3350/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (7/90)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  1 of 5

SUBJECT:  9 5/8" CEMENTATION

1.    PREPARATION

1.1    Check the volumetric efficiency of the mud pumps immediately before the job and monitor both pit
      volumes and pump strokes during the displacement.

1.2    Ensure samples of bulk cement (from the silos to be used for the job), water and additives are sent to
       the Fluids Department in good time for Laboratory testing before the expected job date. Check pre-
        flush requirements and mixing procedures.

1.3   On platforms ensure that the kill line from the cement unit to the production facility is isolated before the
        unit is operated.

1.4    The 9 5/8” casing will normally be cemented with a float shoe and float collar two joints apart.

1.5    The 9 5/8” casing will normally be cemented in a single stage, bringing the lead cement slurry 100m
        inside the 13 3/8” shoe.

1.6   An ancillary pressure recorder is to be used to record the complete operation on a single chart.

          i.e.    Circulating the casing
             Pressure testing
              Preflush displacement
           Lead and tail slurry mixing
             Displacement
            Casing pressure test

       This requires the recorder to be connected to one of the cement head or cement swivel outlets.

1.7    9 5/8” cementation calculations to be performed are:

        1.   Weight of casing prior to landing, equipment safety factors, blockline etc.

        2.   Weight of casing at hanger when cemented to ensure negative buoyancy when landing string held
               in elevators.

        3.   Landing string buoyed weight when SSR in use.

        4.    Circulation volume.

        5.   Volume and density of preflush.

          Note:
       On jack-up wells the spacer volume should be such that if the spacer is returned it indicates that
           theTOCisbelowtheMLH.

        6.   Reduction in hydrostatic due to preflush. Use height of preflush in gauge hole.  Ensure that
               sufficient overbalance is present at all times.

        7.   Lead and tail slurry volume including excess.

        8.    Hydrostatic pressure when cement fully displaced. Check against expected frac pressure @
            shoe.

        9.   Cement, additive and mixwater requirements for lead slurry.

       10.  Cement, additive and mixwater requirements for tail slurry.

       11.  Minimum slurry volume, ignoring excesses.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 2 از 5 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  3350/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (7/90)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  2 of 5

SUBJECT:  9 5/8" CEMENTATION

       12.  Capacity of cement line and displacement volume to shear wiper plug (SSR).

       13.   Theoretical pumping pressures versus slurry and displacement volumes. Prepare a graph.

       14.  Displacement volume.

       15.  Nos. of pump strokes at various pump efficiencies, down to 94%.

       16.  Maximum possible returns from the cement job, ignoring circulating losses, and the maximum
            displacement volume required to catch up with the “U”-tubed cement.

       17.   Slurry mixing time.

       18.  Displacement time.

       19.   Total job time compared to thickening time.

       20.   Theoretical static differential pressure.

       21.  Casing test pressure.

       22.  Maximum circulating and displacing rates to avoid exceeding a maximum allowable ECD, e.g.
             leak off test formation strength.

       23.  Possible TOC in gauge hole.

       24.  Time for bottom plug to bump.

      Note:

      a)  Slurry and displacement volumes are to be calculated by the BP Drilling Supervisor, BP Drilling
          Engineerandcementer.

      b) Ensurecalculatedtopofcementplusexcessdoesnotapproachthewellhead.

      c) Be aware of the effects of “U”-tubing which take place during cement jobs. These effects are most
           noticeable on jobs where there is a large hydrostatic difference between the cement column inside
         thecasing/drillpipeandthemudintheannulus,i.e:

         - Linercementations.
         - Longcasingstring/largevolumecementations.
         - Largedifferencesincement/mudweights.

          During cement mixing/start of displacement, the well may appear to be flowing due to the weight of
         the cement slurry. A reduction in returns will then occur as the mud “chases” the cement. Full
           returnsshouldthenberegainedoncethemudhascaughtupwiththecement.

             It is the responsibility of the Drilling Supervisor to ensure that the Mud Loggers are aware of these
            effects and that they do not confuse them with flow or losses. If there is any doubt as to whether
         the well is flowing, it should be flow checked. If losses are apparent the pump rate should be
          reducedinanattempttoreducethelosses.

2.    CEMENT SLURRIES

2.1     Slurry volume will be based on caliper plus 10% excess.

2.2       If no caliper is available excess volume to be used will be 50% over theoretical volume. Excess to be
       discussed and agreed with the Drilling Superintendent.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 3 از 5 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  3350/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (7/90)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  3 of 5

SUBJECT:  9 5/8" CEMENTATION

2.3    Excess volumes will be confirmed in the programme. Lead slurry will be class G mixed in seawater with
       extenders to a weight of 13.2 ppg (1.58 SG).  Additives will be specified in the drilling programme and
       confirmed by cement telex.

2.4     All attempts should be made to ensure that the top of cement is 100m above the previous casing shoe.

2.5     Tail slurry will be a minimum of 150 linear metres of class G cement mixed in seawater to a weight of
       16.0 ppg (1.92 SG).  Additives will be specified in the drilling programme and confirmed by cement
         telex.

2.6    The tail slurry must cover and isolate any reservoir or critical zone such as salt, as far as practical.

      Note:
    On surface release cement heads, if the plug drop indicator is partially activated by the bottom plug it
      shouldberesettoconfirmthebottomplughasgone.

2.7    Ensure that samples of cement slurry are taken regularly during mixing and set aside for observation.

2.8    Top of cement may be confirmed later either by temperature survey or by CBL.

3.    CEMENTING OPERATIONS

3.1    Circulate casing and condition mud using the same annular velocity as when drilling.  Record
       pressures.

3.2   Minimum circulating volume to be the greater of:

        a)  1.2 times annular volume

        b)  1.2 times casing volume

       Monitor returns for losses or indications of formation fluid influx, especially gas.

            If any influx is noted circulation must be continued until a full annulus volume has been pumped without
        indications of influx.

3.3    Test all cementing lines and equipment to 1000 psi above casing test pressure before circulating.

3.4       If the cement head or cement swivel was not used during circulation install same. Flush cement lines
      and test hook up to 1000 psi above casing pressure test.

3.5   Pump the preflush as outlined in the programme.

            If the well is to be suspended then any water based mud and preflush which will remain in the annulus
      above TOC should be treated with biocide and corrosion inhibitor.

      Note:
     Open hole pressures are to be checked to ensure the reduction in hydrostatic head caused by the
       preflush will not allow the formation to flow. Use maximum height of preflush in gauge hole for this
        calculation.

3.6    Surface Release Cementation

        1.   After pumping the spacer undertake the following:

            a)   Install bottom cement plug. Check:

                           i)   Plug is marked as Bottom Plug.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 4 از 5 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  3350/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (7/90)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  4 of 5

SUBJECT:  9 5/8" CEMENTATION

                            ii)   Plug is correct for casing weight and size.

                              iii)   Plug is below cement line outlet in cement head.

                     iv)  Passage of plug activates plug drop indicator.

            b)  Screw in top plug retainer pin.  Lock pin and tie pin lock in position to ensure lock cannot
                 vibrate loose.

             c)  Reset plug drop indicator (if possible).

            d)   Install top cement plug. Check:

                           i)   Plug is marked as Top Plug.

                            ii)   Type of plug manufacture, i.e. all rubber or hollow aluminium.

                              iii)   Plug is correct for casing weight and size.

            e)  Tighten cement head cap.

             Note:
                 ItistheDrillingSupervisor’sresponsibilitytowitnesspluginstallation.

        2.  Release the bottom plug.

         Note:
             If the plug drop indicator is partially activated by the bottom plug, it should be reset to confirm that
         thebottomplughasgone.

        3.  Mix and pump the calculated volume of lead and tail slurry.

        4.  Release the top plug when the tail slurry has been mixed and pumped. The Drilling Supervisor is
             to witness the plug release and plug drop indicator movement.

                   If there is any doubt that the top plug has failed to release, continue displacement checking both
            the volume pumped and number of strokes.

        5.  Ensure cement lines are flushed clean.

         Note:
       When cementing from a floating unit using a full bore running string, a top and bottom plug will be
          used.

3.7    Subsea Release Cementation

        1.   After mixing and pumping the required lead and tail slurry volumes, release the top plug launching
             dart with the cement line to the rig floor full of cement.

        2.  Pump 2 - 3 bbl of water (or base oil if OBM is being used) to clear the cementing line of cement,
            followed by the required volume of mud to latch the dart into the SSR wiper plug. This should be
          done at 4 - 6 BPM to avoid bypassing the dart.

        3.  Observe the wiper plug shear (+/- 1850 psi). Change lines at the rig floor to allow displacement
            with the rig pump.

3.8    Displace cement with rig pumps at the highest possible rate, consistent with not inducing losses.

      Ensure two lines are connected to the cement head to minimize surface pressures.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 5 از 5 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  3350/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (7/90)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  5 of 5

SUBJECT:  9 5/8" CEMENTATION

3.9   The displacing volume must be measured from the mud tanks. The return and displacing tank
       arrangements are to be planned before cement mixing commences either to displace from one tank
      and return to another or to ensure that a volumetric check is made against pump strokes.  Other
      methods of displacing, i.e. pump strokes, are not accepted as sufficiently accurate to be used as the
       sole method of displacement volume measurement.

       Frequent checks must be made on the mud tanks throughout the displacement to ensure that the
      volume being used compares with the rate of displacement.

3.10   Slow the pumps at the required pump strokes with 100% efficiency, prior to bumping the top plug, and
       record static differential pressure.

            If the cement thickening time is approaching ignore above and continue displacement until the plug
      bumps.

3.11  Bump the plug at a slow pump rate.  If the plug does not bump when expected, limit over displacement
        to half the shoe track volume.

3.12   The maximum number of pump strokes to displace is calculated as:

        (Actual casing volume + 0.5 x shoetrack volume) x 100/volumetric efficiency (%) x strokes/bbl

        Discretion must be exercised to ensure over displacement does not occur where isolation around the
       casing shoe is considered critical.

       Test casing. Test pressure to be the lesser of:

        a)  3500 psi;

        b)  80% of the internal yield pressure of the casing; or

        c)  as advised in drilling programme.

      Note and record volume required to reach test pressure.

       Bleed off pressure and check operation of float equipment. Re-bump plugs if float valves fail to hold,
       maintain static differential pressure until the cement sets sufficiently to prevent backflow, or until the
       surface samples set.

      Release the pressure and check for backflow.


