

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 2 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  4150/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (11/89)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  1 of 2

SUBJECT:  KCL/POLYMER MUD

1.    USE OF KCL/POLYMER MUD

       This is highly inhibitive mud used primarily for drilling reactive tertiary claystone sections.  It can also be
      used to drill older Illite shales where the problem is one of sloughing and cavings rather than “gumbo”
       type problems.

      The system is based on the inhibitive effects of the potassium ion combined with the inhibiting effects of
      a long chain polymer. The polymer, a hydrolysed co-polymer of Polyacrylamide and Polyacrylate with a
       molecular weight of 10 million, forms a viscous gelly like coating that seals pores and fissures slowing
      down the movement of water into the shales.

      The viscosity of the mud is controlled with XC polymer.  Fluid loss control can be obtained with starch
        additions.

      Note:
      This is a non-dispersed system and dispersant should only be added when control of the properties by
        dilutionhasbecomeuneconomical.

2.    FORMULATION

      Seawater
       Caustic                       1.0 ppb
     KCL                         15.0 - 50.0 ppb
       Hydrolysed Polyacrylamide     1.0 ppb (Active)
     XC Polymer                  0.25 ppb
       Starch                        2.0 - 4.0 ppb

2.1   KCL Concentration

      Depending on the reactivity of the shales, concentrations of up to 50 ppb may be required. When
         drilling older shales 15 ppb may be sufficient. An average concentration is 35 ppb.

3.    RUNNING A KCL/POLYMER SYSTEM

        a)  To ease logistics, KCL is usually supplied as a brine.  This is a nominal 80 ppb (1.15 SG).
          However, due to the difficulty in mixing to this level, the concentration is nearer to 80 ppb (1.12
          SG).

        b)  When mixing the system initially, high shear is required to dissolve the hydrolysed polyacrylamide.
                   If this is not possible, then very coarse shaker screens should be run for the first circulation to
           prevent losses due to screen blinding.

        c)    If a KCL concentration of 35 ppb is required, then the initial mud should be mixed to 40 ppb as it
                will be found that the concentration drops rapidly on the first circulation.

        d)  KCL and polyacrylamide concentrations can be measured by specific tests.  It may be necessary to
          add both on “the run”, to maintain the desired concentrations although  it is highly desirable to
           premix all polymer additions. This is due to adsorption on to the shales. As a guide line 1 x 25 ltr
         drum of hydrolysed polyacrylamide should be added to the active system for every 30m of 17 1/2”
           hole drilled.

        e)  When adding polyacrylamide, it should be added directly into the suction pit above the suction to
           prevent “viscosity humping”.

           f)  An excess polyacrylamide concentration of 0.5 ppb should be run.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 2 از 2 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  4150/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (11/89)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  2 of 2

SUBJECT:  KCL/POLYMER MUD

        g)  The MBT maximum for this system is 20 ppb. Above this, control of the rheological properties will
         become difficult.

        h)  At mud weights above 1.40 SG, it is very difficult to run the mud non- diserpsed.

4.    MERITS OF THE KCL/POLYMER SYSTEM

       This is an expensive mud system at approximately twice the cost of a Gypsum/lignosulphonate system.
            It cannot tolerate the solids that a Gypsum/lignosulphonate system can (max MBT, 20 ppb and 30 ppb
        respectively) but the inhibitive properties are far superior to the Gypsum/lignosulphonate system.
      Downtime from blocked flowlines etc. should therefore be less with KCL and hence only with area
       experience will it be possible to say if the increased cost of the mud system is more than offset by rig
       time saving and possible better hole caliper.  It must also be remembered when considering downtime
       from gumbo problems, that part of the problem may be due to a mixture of drilling practices, hole
       cleaning and flowline design as much as to mud chemistry.

      The mud described above is the “full” system. However, it can be run without the polyacrylamide which
          will make a cheaper system. However, area experience will again dictate if this is cost effective.


