

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 5 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  4160/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  3 (8/90)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  1 of 5

SUBJECT:  INVERSE OIL EMULSION MUD

1.    USES OF INVERSE OIL EMULSION MUD (IOEM)

       Inverse oil emulsion mud is a “reverse” emulsion in which a refined mineral oil is the continuous phase
        with emulsified brine as the discontinuous phase. The diameter of the brine droplets is less than 1
       micron.

      The oil continuous phase makes the system ideal for drilling claystone sequences and halites. The
       temperaure stability of the mud system is significantly higher than for most water based systems and it
        therefore has particular application for high temperature (greater than 300°F) and high pressure wells.

2.    COMPONENTS OF THE IOEM SYSTEM

2.1   The Oil Phase

       This is the main component of the system and is the continuous phase into which all other products are
       mixed. As the basis of the system, its characteristics exert a significant effect upon the properties of the
      mud.

         All the IOEM now run are of the low toxicity class. These are systems in which diesel oil has been
       replaced by a D.En approved low toxicity mineral oil. These oils are lower in aromatic and sulpher
       content than diesel. As a result, the “clean” oils have a lower chemical activity making it more difficult to
       obtain viscosity and emulsification properties than in a diesel system.

        In general, the lower the viscosity and aromatic content of the oil, the more difficult it is to build the mud
          initially. However, the low viscosity oils are desirable when high temperature, high mud weight systems
       are considered.

2.2    Brine Phase - Balanced Activity

      Many formations are capable of extracting water from IOEM by the process of osmosis. This can result
         in the formation hydrating and swelling much as if drilled with a water base mud.

      The absorption occurs because of a difference in chemical potential between the mud and the
        formation.  In general, the more deeply buried the formation, the less water it contains and hence the
        greater the chemical potential. To offset this, the salinity of the water phase is increased to match the
       chemical potential of the formation.  If the two are not balanced, then water will either be drawn into the
       formation  if the mud salinity is low or from the formation into the mud  if the salinity is too high.   It is
     common practice to increase the salinity of the mud with depth to balance the increased chemical
        potential of the older shales.

     When defining the brine phase of the mud, it is either written as mg/l of chloride ion or as the activity of
       the mud.

2.3    Emulsifiers

        In general, oil muds contain a primary and a secondary emulsifier. The function of the primary
        emulsifier is to produce the emulsion, the secondary emulsifier provides for the oil wetting of the drill
        solids and barytes.

        Fatty acids, in particular, Tall oil fatty acids, are the most common primary emulsifier. When lime is
      added to the mud, the calcium soap is formed.

      Note:
      Thisclassofemulsifierwillnotfunctionwithoutlime.
     Thesecondaryemulsifiersaregenerallyofthepolyamidetype.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 2 از 5 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  4160/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  3 (8/90)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  2 of 5

SUBJECT:  INVERSE OIL EMULSION MUD

2.4    Viscosifiers

       Emulsified water increases the mud viscosity, however, amine treated clays are the primary product for
        viscosity control. The most widely used clay is montmorillonite (bentonite) which is reacted with a
       quaternary ammonium salt to render it oil dispersible.

2.5    Factors Affecting the Performance of an Organophilic Clay

      The critical factor in the performance of an organophilic clay is its ability to swell properly. The largest
        part of the mud is the base oil which also has the most effect on the clay’s performance. The organic
        portion of the clay can be selected to aid solvation, but the general rule is, the more aromatic or
      napthemic an oil, the better the performance will be. The most difficult oils in which to produce
        solvation are those that are 100% paraffinic in nature.

      The water phase of an invert system greatly enhances the organophilic clay performance.  This can
        easily be demonstrated by changing the oil/water ratio of a system. Moving from a true oil mud to an
        invert emulsion with an oil/water ratio of 70:30 the yield point obtained from a given concentration of
       organoclay can rise tenfold.

2.6    Application of an Organophilic Clay

      The main physical factors effecting the performance of the clay are:

            i)   Shear.
             ii)   Heat.
              iii)  Method of addition.

        In the clean oils,  it is difficult to obtain viscosity due to the lack of chemical reactivity of the oil. The
     maximum viscosity that the clay can impart can be achieved either through high shear such as through
       the bit or alternatively, heat will also have a similar effect.

            If adequate mixing facilities are available, the brine could be added directly to the dispersed clay in oil.
      The organoclay would act as an emulsifier to prevent its own settling and phase separation at the same
       time as  it begins to develop a gel structure.  Emulsifiers could then be added and although some
        structure will be lost, the rheology of the finished initial mix should be closer to that of a circulated mud.

2.7     Filtration Control

        Additives that are used for filtration control are asphalt, gilsonite and amine treated lignites. Asphalt is
       not used by BP as its use increases the toxicity of the mud system. Amine treated lignites are the
        preferred product.

2.8     Oil Wetting Agents

      Because most minerals carry a negative charge, cationic or positively charged molecules are used as
          oil wetting agents. Lecithin is one amongst many compounds that are used for this purpose.

      The hydrocarbon tail dissolves in the oil and the polar head in the water phase with the quaternary
      amine attaching itself to the mineral surface.

3.    PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF IOEM/TYPICAL PARAMETERS

3.1    Oil/Water Ratio

        Oil/water ratio in the UKCS primarily to meet D.En criteria on discharged cuttings. Other reasons are:

            i)  The higher the oil/water ratio, the more expensive the system as not only is more oil required, but
         more viscosifier and fluid loss additive is required.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 3 از 5 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  4160/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  3 (8/90)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  3 of 5

SUBJECT:  INVERSE OIL EMULSION MUD

             ii)  With increasing mud weight  it becomes increasingly difficult to maintain a stable emulsion and
           prevent water wetting with a high water content.

                 Mud Weight
         Oil/Water      (SG)

        50/50         To 1.20
        51/49 - 55/45   1.21 - 1.32
        56/44 - 59/41   1.33 - 1.45
        60/40 - 65/35   1.46 - 1.55
        66/34 - 69/31   1.56 - 1.68
        70/30 - 79/21   1.69 - 1.92
        80/20 - 90/10   1.93 - 2.28


      The exception to this rule is whilst drilling Zechstein Salt Formation. Even with a mud weight of 1.20
      SG, it is advisable to run an oil/water of 75/25 - 80/20. This is to minimise the effects of salt water flows
      and water spotted to free stuck pipe.

3.2    Viscosity

      The funnel viscosity is of little relevance in IOEM due to the large variations with temperature.

      The PV, YP and Gels should as a standard be measured at 120°F.  However, when the average
        circulating temperature is significantly different, the rheology should also be determined at the flowline
       temperature.

        Typical rheological properties are:

      17 1/2”   PV 30 - 40 cP
             YP ± 25 lbs/100 sq.ft

      12 1/4”   PV 30 - 40 cP
             YP 18 - 22 lbs/100 sq.ft

      8 1/2”    PV 20 - 40 cP
             YP 15 - 20 lbs/100 sq.ft

      Note:
      Forguidelinesonrheologiesrequiredforholecleaning,seeSection4900.

3.3    Water Phase Salinity

      The chlorides should be reported as mg/L in the water phase not on the entire mud.  In the majority of
       cases, calcium chloride will be used to make up the brine phase.

       Chloride content as a general rule is run between 150,000 - 170,000 mg/L.

      Note:
     Themaximumconcentrationwithsodiumchlorideisapproximately180,000mg/L.

3.4   HTHP Fluid Loss

       This is, as a standard, carried out at 500 psi. The temperature will depend on the formation
       temperature. However, the minimum should be 200°F as this test also gives a measure of the stability
        of the system. No water should appear in the filtrate as this is a sign of a weakening emulsion.  If water
      does appear, it should be treated with emulsifier rather than a fluid loss additive. Lowering the fluid loss


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 4 از 5 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  4160/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  3 (8/90)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  4 of 5

SUBJECT:  INVERSE OIL EMULSION MUD

       with amine treated lignite may remove water from the filtrate but this is only masking an inherent
      weakness in the emulsion.

3.5   Mud Weight

       Temperature should be reported with mud weight due to the changes that occur.

3.6     Electrical Stability

       This test is very operator dependant and should only be used as a guide. A steady decrease in voltage
      can be taken as an indication that an emulsifier treatment is required. A minimum voltage is usually
       taken as 500 volts. However, in 12 1/4” and 8 1/2” intervals values from 1000-2000 may be obtained.
       Conversely in 17 1/2” hole, values of only 300 volts may be obtained due to low shear and high dilution
        rates.

4.    POTENTIAL PROBLEMS WITH IOEM

4.1    Water Wetting

     When water wetting of the solids occurs, it will show itself in a number of ways:

            i)  The mud will have a “grainy appearance”.

             ii)  Water breakout may occur in the filtrate.

              iii)  Electrical stability will drop.

            If the wetting becomes severe, then the drilled solids coming over the shakers will stick together.  It may
      even be posible for the geologist to wash the cuttings samples in water rather than diesel. Barytes will
       also be removed over the mud cleaner screens.

       This situation can result from:

            i)   Fast drilling in the 17 1/2” interval.

             ii)   Insufficient treatment with either emulsifiers and/or oil wetting agent.

              iii) A rapid weight up.

          iv) A water flow.

      Under conditions i), iii) and iv) periodic treatments of oil wetting agent should be made.

4.2    Hole Cleaning

      See Section 4900.

4.3    Salt Drilling

       Whilst drilling long salt sections, the salt may “creep” resulting in stuck pipe. This is particularly true for
     IOEM which drills a near gauge hole.

      The most likely time for becoming stuck is whilst making a connection. The recommended practice for
       avoiding this is:

        1.   Drill kelly off completely.
        2.   Pull up with pumps on.
        3.  Ream single down.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 5 از 5 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  4160/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  3 (8/90)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  5 of 5

SUBJECT:  INVERSE OIL EMULSION MUD

            If the string becomes stuck  it is usually at the bit and can be freed by pumping/soaking a 20-30 bbl
       seawater pill containing 1 - 2% by volume drilling detergent.

      Another potential problem occurs whilst drilling the Zechstein Salt Formation which contains
      Magnesium salts. The Magnesium reacts with the lime in the mud system removing the excess
        concentration.   If this is not replaced, then the primary emulsifiers of the fatty acid type will no longer
        function with potentially disastrous results.  Providing an excess lime concentration is maintained this
       should not be a problem. The polyamide type emulsifiers are not affected by the Magnesium.

     Mud cleaners should be run whilst drilling any salt formation as the salt crystals have a high affinity for
       water and can extract water from the emulsion resulting in “water breakout” in the HTHP filtrate.

4.4    Water Flows

       This is a particular problem in high weight, high oil/water ratio systems. The influx of a small amount of
       water will result in a relatively large drop in the oil/water ratio with a rapid increase in viscosity and
       decrease in emulsion stability.

       Whilst drilling in the Zechstein Salt Formation in the Southern North Sea, high pressure Magnesium salt
       water flows can occur and although mud weights are low, the combined effect of Magnesium and water
      can have disastrous results.

            If the mud has not been properly pre-treated, it can, and has resulted in, the eventual “flipping” of the
     mud with barytes settlement and eventual packing off of the drill string. To avoid this, emulsifier and oil
       wetting treatments should be maintained at a high level and a minimum 2-3 ppb excess lime
       concentration carried.

      Excess emulsifier concentrations must be determined whilst drilling these sequences.

4.5    Pollution

      See environmental guidelines for drilling operations.


