

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 2 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  4200/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (11/89)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  1 of 2

SUBJECT:  BARYTES PLUG - WATER BASED MUD

1.    APPLICATION

      The use of Barytes plugs is limited to extreme or emergency conditions where it is imperative that some
      measures be taken to seal off the bottom section of a borehole.  This type of plug is applicable in
       several types of situations, including:

        1.  Simultaneous kicking and lost circulation.

        2.  Abandonment procedure allowing safe withdrawal of drill pipe to allow setting of cement plug.

        3.  Withdrawal of drill pipe to either set casing or repair existing casing strings.

        4.  Plugging drill pipe in emergency situations.

1.1    Function

         Ideally, a successful Barytes plug should accomplish two things:

        1.   Initially, the weight of the Barytes slurry should kill the well.

        2.   After a period of time, the settled Barytes plug should mechanically block any flow up the wellbore.
             In reality, it is unlikely that the first objective can be achieved if a high pressure kick is experienced.

1.2    Design of Barytes Plug - Water Base Mud

      The following factors must be taken into account when designing a Barytes plug:

1.2.1   Slurry Weight

      The requirement of a Barytes plug is that the Barytes settles as rapidly as possible within the limits that
              it is possible to displace the slurry without plugging off the drill string. As the settlement rate is inversely
        proportional to the slurry weight, the slurry weight should be the minimum required. The range of slurry
       weight is generally 1.90 - 2.60 SG.  Lighter weight slurries, in the range of 1.70 - 1.90 SG, are
       suggested for setting plugs inside casing or drill strings where filtration does not occur and rapid settling
         is desirable.  Higher weight slurries are suggested for the open hole where both settling and high
          filtration aid in making an immovable seal.

1.2.2   Slurry Volume

      The effective settled/compacted height of the Barytes is less than that of the slurry as pumped.  This
       should be taken into account when determining the volume required. As a guideline, tests on a 2.40
     SG slurry indicate that the settled height is approximately 70% of the original height.  In general, a
        settled plug height of 50 - 150m is sufficient.

1.2.3   Slurry Viscosity

      The higher the viscosity of the slurry, the lower the settlement rate will be. A high settlement rate is
       obviously desirable from the stand point of blocking off flow from the well.  In addition, the higher the
       settlement rate, the harder the settled pack of Barytes is.

       Settlement rates for high weight slurries are normally too low and require a dispersant to increase the
         rate. The required dosage will depend on:

            i)   Dispersant type.
             ii)   Slurry weight.
              iii)  Barytes quality.

      Any dispersant such as Lignosulphonate, SAPP or Polyacrylate can be used.  However, because of
        variation in Barytes quality, it is essential that a pilot test is carried out. As a result of variation in


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 2 از 2 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  4200/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (11/89)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  2 of 2

SUBJECT:  BARYTES PLUG - WATER BASED MUD

       Barytes quality and dispersant used,  it is not possible to give dispersant concentrations required.
      However, laboratory tests and a field trial indicate that slurry should have the following approximate
       rheology at ± 60°F.

        Yield point -5 to -8.

      The mix should be made in drill water in which the pH has been adjusted to 9.5 - 10.5 with caustic.
       Barytes and drill water requirements are listed below for various slurry weights.

      SlurryWeight   DrillWater   Barytes
       SG          gal/bbl     lbs/bbl

           1.70            33.0        313.5
           1.90            29.8        424.0
           2.10            26.7        534.6
           2.40            23.6        645.2
           2.65            20.4        755.8

1.3    Mixing Procedure

      The slurry can be mixed in either a well agitated slug pit or using the cementing unit.  If the slug pit is
       used, particular attention will be required to ensure that Barytes does not settle out whilst mixing.
       Mixing may require two centrifugal pumps as the slurry weight increases towards 2.40 SG.

            If the cementing unit is used, the liquid phase should be mixed in the mud pits and then transferred to
       the cementing unit for weighting up.

1.4    Displacement Procedure

       Displacement techniques are the same as in cementing, i.e. the slurry should be underdisplaced.
     When calculating the volumes for the displacement, adjust so that the height of the slurry will be 2
        barrels greater inside the drill pipe. This allows the drill pipe to be withdrawn with a natural slug.  It will
       also minimise movement of the slurry in the hole which causes contamination.

      Because of the high density of these slurries, high differential pressure can be created by excessive
       underdisplacement or overdisplacement. So care must be taken while calculating the displacement
       volumes.

        After spotting the plug, the drill string must be withdrawn immediately from the plug to prevent sticking
      due to Barytes settlement.  Circulate clean on top of the plug. A displacement rate of 5-8 bbl/min is
      recommended.  If possible, the plug should be displaced either open ended or through a bit containing
      no nozzles.  In a field trial, however a 2.40 SG plug was displaced through a bit containing 3 x 13
       nozzles with an increase in pressure of 200 - 400 psi observed as the plug exited the bit.

      The plug should not be displaced through a bit containing nozzles unless the string contains a
        circulating sub or unless the drilling office is first consulted.


