

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 9 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  4300/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (11/89)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  1 of 9

SUBJECT:  LOST CIRCULATION

1.    CAUSES OF LOST CIRCULATION

     Mud loss or circulation loss is the loss of mud or cement to the formation during drilling operations.
      Losses can result from either natural or self induced causes.

1.1    Natural Losses

       Three types of formation can be identified into which losses can occur.

        a)  Coarse Sands and Gravel Beds

           Formation openings into which mud is lost must be about three times larger than the particle size
           found in the mud. Thus a formation must typically have a permeability in excess of 10 - 25 Darcys
              for mud to be lost. Therefore, this type of loss is practically confined to gravels and coarse sands
           near surface.

        b)  Natural Fissures of Fractures

          These can be very permeable under normal conditions and are the source of production in some
              fields.  In BPX’s world-wide operations, they are the main cause of lost circulation.  Losses can
           occur at very low overbalance pressure.

        c)  Cavernous Formations

          Caverns are normally found in limestone and dolomite.

1.2    Induced Fractures

        In formations where the difference between pore pressure and fracture pressure is low, losses may
       occur to formation facture caused by drilling ECD or surge/swab pressures.

1.3    Excessive Overbalance

       Excessive overbalance may in some instances not fracture but losses through the pores may occur.

2.    PREVENTION OF LOST CIRCULATION

       For all drilling operations, lost circulation prevention procedures should be considered. Listed below are
        potential causes and measures which can be taken to prevent losses occurring.

2.1    Increase in annular mud weight due to drilled cuttings can result in formation breakdown, particularly in
       surface holes. The effective increase in annular mud weight must be calculated and taken into account.

      Example

     ROP                30 metres/hour
        Circulation Rate      1200 gpm
       Hole Size            17 1/2 inches
        Input Mud Weight      1.08 sg
       Formation Density     2.30 sg

       Resultant mud weight (MW) = 1.10 sg

2.2     Viscosity and gel strengths of the mud should be maintained within the programme specification.  If the
        yield point is too high, breaking circulation may induce losses. On breaking circulation, always start
        circulation slowly and speed up the pump only after returns are obtained.

            If viscosities are very high, circulation should be broken at stages whilst running through the open hole.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 2 از 9 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  4300/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (11/89)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  2 of 9

SUBJECT:  LOST CIRCULATION

       High viscosity can increase the ECD to a level which will break down the formation whilst circulating.
     When calculating ECD values in critical situations, account should be taken of the OD of pipe
       connections. The effect of drill pipe rubbers should also be considered in such situations.

2.3    Excessive surge pressure whilst running in the pipe can fracture the formation. In areas of potential lost
        circulation, surge pressure calculations should be performed and the driller instructed as to the
     maximum allowable speed for running pipe.

      Note:
      Surgepressureisplacedontheformationthemomentthestringisruninthehole. Inareasofpotential
       lostcirculation,trippingspeedsmustbecontrolledallthewayto/fromsurface.

2.4     In areas of hole instability sloughing or swelling shales can pack off around the pipe reducing or
       preventing circulation.  If the pump is not slowed or stopped at this point, the formation can be broken
      down. The driller should be made aware of areas of potential hole instability.

3.    REPORTING OF LOST CIRCULATION

     When reporting instances of lost circulation, the following is to be included:

        1.   Static Loss Rate         bbl/hr.

        2.  Dynamic Loss Rate     bbl/hr @ gpm.

        3.  Depth.

        4.  Note  if the losses build to the loss rate gradually or suddenly.  This is helpful for distinguishing
           losses through pores which require only fine LCM and losses into fractures which can require
           coarser grades.

3.1    Determination of the Source of Lost Circulation

3.2   Non Formation Losses

     When lost circulation occurs the following procedure should be followed:

        1.   Establish loss rate.

        2.  Check all surface equipment to ensure no losses.

        3.  Check with mud logger/mud engineer that no mud has been dumped/transferred or no solids
             control equipment has been switched on.

        4.  Check that the riser slip joint packing is not leaking.

       Other non formation possibilities are:

        1.  Leaking casing. A packer should be run to determine the loss depth in this instance.

        2.  Riser leaks.

3.3    Formation Losses

            If losses are experienced whilst drilling,  it is likely that the losses are on bottom.   If losses are
       experienced whilst tripping or whilst increasing mud weight,  it is likely that the loss zone is not on
       bottom. Methods for establishing the loss zone are:


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 3 از 9 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  4300/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (11/89)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  3 of 9

SUBJECT:  LOST CIRCULATION

        a)  Temperature Survey. Normally requires two runs. However, a variation of the technique can be
          used by stopping the sonde at a certain depth and pumping for a short period.  This will give a
          temperature change. The instrument is lowered to successive levels in the hole until no
           temperature change is recorded (i.e. no flow to formation past this point).

        b)  Spinner Survey.  Flowrate is indicated on film according to the speed of a varied rotor on the
            instrument.

        c)  TracerSurvey. Using a gamma ray log and radioactive material.

          Conventional. Run a base log through the drill pipe. Then pump a slug of mud with radioactive
            material down the drill pipe and repeat the log. Where the sonde encounters a high radioactivity it
            indicates the loss point.

            Variation.  If point of loss is suspected near last casing shoe, a small quantity of radioactive iodine
          can be pumped down the annulus. The sonde is run inside the drill pipe, following the tracer, while
                      it is being pumped. The loss point has been reached when radioactive contact is lost.

4.    PROCEDURES FOR CURING LOST CIRCULATION

4.1    Reducing Mud Weight

     When lost circulation is experienced, if possible, the mud weight should be reduced. An estimate of the
     maximum mud weight the formation can stand can be obtained by the method described below.

        1.    If there are returns, fill the annulus with a measured volume of water or base oil, depending upon
        mud system, and calculate the new gradient.

        2.    If there are no returns when pumping:

            a)  Same as “1”.

            b)  Compare the circulating pressure prior to the losses occurring (Pressure A) with the pressure
                  at the same circulating rate after the losses have occured (Pressure B).

               Pressure A - Pressure B                                  =   height of empty hole            Mud Weight psi/metre

                           If the position of the loss zone is known a new mud gradient can be calculated to balance the
             weak formation.

               Reduction of the ECD may be ncessary in some instances.

4.2   Use of Lost Circulation Material

       There are many types of lost circulation material available which have applications according to the type
        of losses experienced. Typical materials used are:

       Conventional LCM

       Flake         Mica
                     Cellophane

       Granular        Nutshells
                     Calcium Carbonate
                         Salt


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 4 از 9 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  4300/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (11/89)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  4 of 9

SUBJECT:  LOST CIRCULATION

       Fibrous        Glass Fibre
                 Wood Fibre
                     Animal Fibre

      Note:
      Inoilbasedmuds,thelistedfibrousmaterialscannotbeusedasthematerialscanseverelyweakenthe
      emulsionstability.“Ven-Fyber”,acellulosicfibretreatedtorenderitoilwettableisused.

       High Fluid Loss Slurry

       Diaseal M
        Seelit
       Sureseal

       Reinforcing Plugs and Cement

        Oil/bentonite plug (water based muds).
       Water/organophilic clay plug (oil based muds).

      As stated, the choice of pill depends on the type of lost circulation experienced.  In general, the
        reinforcing plugs and cement formulations are considered to be specialised formulations for severe lost
        circulation circumstances and should not be used as a matter of routine.

5.    LCM FORMULATIONS AND SPOTTING PROCEDURES (NON-RESERVOIR)

      For each of the following circumstances, two alternative LCM formulations are given. Each is
       considered to be acceptable.

      Notes:
      a)  It is considered that LCM concentrations in excess of 30 to 45 ppb are unlikely to have increased
            benefit.
      b) When considering concentrations, the density of the LCM must be considered. For example, liquid
          casing and OM Seal have densities of 1.1 sg compared to 2.7 sg for calcium carbonate. Thus
          higherconcentrationsofthemoredensematerialarerequiredtoobtainthesamevolumeofLCM.

5.1   Seepage Losses (Losses less than 10 bbl/hour)

       Option 1

      Add mica fine to the circulating system at 4 to 5 x 25 kg per hour for several hours.

       Option 2

      Add liquid casing to the circulating system at 4 to 5 x 25 lbs per hour for several hours.

      Loss Rate (10 - 20 bbl/hour)

       Option 1

      Mica fine                               +/- 15 ppb
      Mica medium                          +/- 15 ppb

       Option 2

        Liquid casing                   15 ppb


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 5 از 9 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  4300/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (11/89)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  5 of 9

SUBJECT:  LOST CIRCULATION

5.2   Loss Rate (Greater than 20 bbl/hour)

       Option 1

      Mica fine                      15 ppb
      Mica medium                   15 ppb
       Kwikseal medium                15 ppb

        or for OBM Venfyber at 8 ppb instead of Kwikseal.

      Note:
      Kwikseal medium can result in excessive filter cable build-up. Care must therefore be exercised when
       trippingpastthelostcirculationzone.

       Option 2

        Liquid casing                   15 ppb
    OM Seal                       15 ppb
       Marble (5 micron median)         10 ppb

      Note

            If these formulations are unsuccessful, an alternative formulation is:

        Liquid casing or mica fine         15 ppb
       Kwikseal coarse                 25 ppb

       For OBM, replace Kwikseal coarse by Venfyber at 15 ppb.

       Kwikseal coarse may result in nozzle plugging.

5.3    Precautions

        a)  When an MWD tool is the drill string, coarse grade LCM should not be pumped. For materials such
          as Kwikseal and Venfyber, recommendations of the MWD supplier should be sought.

        b)  Liquid casing and OM seal should not be used above 250°F.

        c)  The pill should be displaced at approximately 200 gpm.

        d)  When lost circulation is expected the minimum nozzle size should be 16/32nd.  If smaller sizes are
            required, a circulating sub should be incorporated into the string.

        e)  A rule of “thumb” for successful bridging is that the LCM will block an opening three times its
           diameter.  Whilst this may apply for grannular materials,  it is doubtful  if  it applies to fibrous
            materials. For these materials, the figure may be in excess of 5 times its size.

5.4    High Fluid Loss Slurry

      These slurries are good for induced fractures where bridging is not paramount but a high pressure drop
       along the fracture is. Mud solids should provide the fines to bridge with this material.

        Slurry formulations for 1 finished bbl are given below:


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 6 از 9 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  4300/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (11/89)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  6 of 9

SUBJECT:  LOST CIRCULATION

      SlurryDensity   DiatomaceousEarth   Barytes  Seawater
       SG              lbs            lbs       bbl

            1.08                 50.0             0         0.93
            1.20                 42.6             60.0        0.90
            1.30                 38.9             120.0       0.86
            1.45                 35.8             180.0       0.83
            1.55                 32.7             230.0       0.80
            1.70                 29.3             290.0       0.76
            1.80                 26.5             350.0       0.73

        1.  A slurry volume of 50-100 bbl is used.

        2.   Pull off bottom to just above the loss zone.

        3.  Displace slurry with mud out of the drill string.

        4.    If returns are obtained and the hole is full, close the annular preventer and squeeze with a
         maximum of 500 psi squeeze pressure. The hesitation technique is preferred.   If all the slurry is
          squeezed to the formation, hold pressure for 30 minutes.

        5.    If no returns are obtained and the hole cannot be filled after displacing the slurry out of the drill
             string a second LCM slurry should be pumped.

5.4.1  Note When Using High Fluid Loss Slurry

        1.   In zones of low porosity but containing fractures, the slurry will only filter once the fracture width
           reaches that of the maximum particle size in the slurry. Therefore, there is a need to add additional
            bridging LCM. A concentration of 10 ppb of fibrous LCM is usually added such as Kwikseal fine.
           Nothing coarser should be used or it may prevent the ingress of the DE.

        2.  Hydrostatic pressure is often enough to seal the loss zone. A squeeze pressure is applied,
          however to open up and then seal fractures which would otherwise cause problems later.

        3.  The basic slurry or slurry containing low concentrations of fibre can be pumped through bit jets.

        4.   In oil base muds, the same procedure with some modifications can be used.

            a)  The mixing pit and mixing lines should be cleaned and washed with water.

            b)  Formulate the slurry as previously described.

             c)  Pump a 20 bbl oil spacer in front of the slurry and balance behind.

            d)  The displacement and squeeze procedure is as previously.

         Extreme caution should be exercised during the surface mixing of the slurry to prevent
           contamination of the mud.

6.    LCM FORMULATIONS (RESERVOIR SECTIONS)

            If losses occur in the reservoir interval, the first step should be to reduce the mud weight.  If this is not
       possible and after prior approval from the onshore drilling superintendent, the following LCM’s can be
       used. However, specific permission of the relevant field or exploration groups may be required.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 7 از 9 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  4300/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (11/89)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  7 of 9

SUBJECT:  LOST CIRCULATION

       Option 1 (Liquid Casing)

      Loss rate < 20 bbl/hour:       Liquid Casing      15 ppb

      Loss rate > 20 bbl/hour:       Liquid Casing      15 ppb
                     OM Seal          15 ppb
                                 Marble (5 micron)   10 ppb

      Notes:
      1) ThisLCMsystemshouldnotbeusedwithtemperatureabove250°F.
      2)  Liquid casing/OM seal are only 40% soluble in HCl. They are however almost totally soluble in 2%
           hypochloritesolution.
      3)  Although this material is only partially acid soluble, it has been approved for reservoir applications.
          Thisisduetothefactthatthematerialisveryeasilyback-flowed.

       Option 2 (Marble)

      Seepage (Less than 10 bbl/hour)

      Add (50 micron median size) to the circulating system at 4/5 x 25 kg sacks per hour for several hours.

      Loss Rate 10 - 20 bbl/hour

      50 micron median size       15 ppb
      150 micron median size      15 ppb

      Loss Rate 20 - 40 bbl/hour

      50 micron median size       15 ppb
      150 micron median size      15 ppb
      600 micron median size      15 ppb

      Notes:
      1) Nozzlesizemustbe3timeslargerthanthelargestparticlesizetobepumped.
      2) Thematerialisacid(HCl)soluble.
      3) Marble is preferred to the normal calcium carbonate. This is because the material retains its grind
          sizeunlikecalciumcarbonatewhichiseasilygrounddown.

7.    SPECIALISED FORMULATIONS

      As discussed in Section 4.2, there are specialised formulations for severe cases of lost circulation.
      These are discussed below:

7.1    Oil/Bentonite Plug

      The plug uses the fact that bentonite will not hydrate in oil but when water contacts the oil/bentonite
        mixture, a solid strong material is formed. In seawater based muds, a fresh water spacer is pumped in
         front of and behind oil spacers to promote the hydration of the bentonite which would be poor in a saline
       environment.

       Procedure (Displacement)

        1.  The slurry is preferably pumped through open ended pipe.   It can however, be pumped through
           nozzles if it is not possible to trip out of the hole.

        2.  Flush cement unit, slug pit and all surface lines with base oil - either base oil or diesel.

        3.  Mix 300 ppb bentonite into the base oil: a viscous slurry will result.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 8 از 9 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  4300/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (11/89)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  8 of 9

SUBJECT:  LOST CIRCULATION

        4.  Pump 30 bbl of fresh water.

        5.  Pump 10 bbl of base oil.

        6.  Pump the plug.

        7.  Pump 10 bbl of base oil.

        8.  Pump 30 bbl of fresh water.

        9.  Displace the plug to the bottom of the drill string.

      Squeeze Operation

        1.    If the hole is full, close the annular and squeeze at 300 - 500 psi into the formation.

        2.    If the hole is not full, close the annular and pump at the same rate down the annulus and drill pipe.

        3.  Allow four hours for the plug to set.

      Note:
   A cement squeeze can be used on top of the base oil/bentonite plug, the latter providing a backing for
      thecementtopreventitslossintotheformation.

7.2   Base Oil/Bentonite/Cement

            If the base oil/bentonite plug does not work, a base oil/bentonite/cement plug is recommended. A
       concentration of 300 - 500 lbs of bentonite and cement in a 1:1 mixture is mixed into the base oil. The
       displacement and squeeze procedure is as for the oil/bentonite plug.

7.3    Water/Organophilic Clay Plug

        In oil based muds, the reverse of an oil/bentonite plug is used, the water/organophilic clay plug.  In oil
      muds, a clay which has been chemically treated to render it oil dispersable is used to provide viscosity.
       This organophilic clay will not yield in water but will yield in oil in the presence of water.

      Thus if a high concentration of clay dispersed in water is pumped to the loss zone, on contact with oil
      mud, it will form a strong solid material.

       Formulation (for 1 bbl mix)

                           Unweighted

      Water                    0.72 bbl
       Caustic                   1.5 lbs
       Dispersant                3.5 lbs
       Organophilic Clay       250.0 lbs

       Mixing/Displacement Procedure

        1.  The slurry is preferably pumped through open ended pipe.   It can, however, be pumped through
           nozzles if it is not possible to trip out of the hole.

        2.  Flush cement unit, slug pit and all surfce lines with a water rig wash mixture to clean the lines.
        When the lines are deemed to be clean, flush again with water.

        3.  Mix the slurry as previously outlined.

        4.  Pump 10 bbl of base oil.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 9 از 9 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  4300/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (11/89)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  9 of 9

SUBJECT:  LOST CIRCULATION

        5.  Pump 10 bbl of water.

        6.  Pump the slurry.

        7.  Pump 10 bbl of water.

        8.  Pump 10 bbl of base oil.

        9.  Displace the plug to the bottom of the drill string.

      Note:
     The function of the base oil spacer is to separate the oil mud and water to prevent gelling in the drill
        string.

      Squeeze Operation

      The squeeze operation is carried out as per the procedures outlined for the oil/bentonite plug.

      Note:
     Cementcannotbeusedinwaterorganophilicclayplug.

8.    LOST CIRCULATION WHILST DIVERTER DRILLING

       For drilling top hole sections (26”) where it is believed that mud will help to stabilise the hole the use of
       the riser/diverter may be programmed.   If losses occur in this situation which cannot be cured by
       reducing the ROP, it is likely that the only effective course of action to take will be to pull the riser and to
           drill the section with seawater and viscous pills in the usual way.

8.1    Internal Blowout

       Excessive wellbore pressure, with a closed-in well after a “kick”, can cause a formation breakdown and
      an internal blow-out.

       This type of lost circulation is difficult to cure. Prepare heavy mud if possible 3 times the volume of drill
       pipe contents and open hole volume from bottom to the casing shoe. Also prepare 100 bbls pills with a
       high concentration of LCM to be pumped down the annulus with light weight mud that the hole could
       stand before the kick.

     Pump heavy mud down the drill pipe and up the annulus to the shoe (or point of losses) and
       simultaneously pump the 100 bbls of LCM pill down the annulus. Calculate the time and pump speeds
         in annulus and drill pipe in such a manner that both columns arrive at the point of loss at the same time.

       Fast pumping of the heavy mud and if necessary of the light weight mud initially, whilst slowing down to
        half speed or less as the plugging material is allowed time to seal off the formation.

      Note that the pressure of the column should be in balance or slightly over balanced to kill the well.


