

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 5 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  5225/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (11/89)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  1 of 5

SUBJECT:  PACKERS: "BOBCAT" RETRIEVABLE BRIDGE PLUG

1.    GENERAL DESCRIPTION

      The Bobcat Retrievable Bridge Plug is a packer element type of plug using one set of compression set
         slips to anchor the plug against pressure forces from above and below.

      The packer elements expand and contact the casing only when the plug is set. This allows fluid to by-
      pass around the tool as well as through it for smooth trips in and out of the hole and allows the packer
       element to reach setting depth in new condition.

      The single slip design requires only compression slips to hold differential pressure loads from above
      and below.  With a pressure differential from above, the slips operate as simple compression slips.
       With pressure differential from below, the load is taken on the back side of the slips. While the pressure
         tries to pump the tool up hole,  it also forces the slip cone down under the slips, thus maintaining the
         slips set.

     When the packer elements are expanded, they exert a force that tends to hold the slip cone under the
         slips. This allows a tension load to be exerted on the plug to determine if it is set.

      The plug is set and released with right hand rotation.  This allows washing down to the tool with right
      hand rotation to get onto the fishing neck and to mill up any junk above the tool. The only left hand
       torque required is 1/4 turn at the tool to remove the running tool from the plug.

      The Bobcat Retrievable Bridge Plug can be set and released any number of times during a trip in the
        hole.

2.    DESIGN FEATURES

      SettablePackerElements
       Packer elements are run and retrieved in a relaxed condition, thereby eliminating possible damage due
        to perforations or burrs inside the casing. The elements are expanded when the plug is set and provide
      a positive seal as long as the tool is set.

      “Bobcat”SlipMechanism
       This system utilises a compression set slip arrangement that provides restraint against differential
       pressure forces above or below the plug.  This eliminates tension slips that can accidentally set while
        retrieving and often are difficult to release.

      RightHandSettingandReleasing
      The plug is set and retrieved with only right hand rotation. The only left hand torque applied is to
       release the overshot from the plug after setting.  This design permits rotating down to wash off sand
      and debris when retrieving the plug.

      LargeBy-PassArea
        Fluid by-passes through tool and around tool while running or retrieving. This provides easier running
      and retrieving by eliminating floating action of cup type plugs.

      BalancedTypeEqualizingValve
       Equalizing valve is balanced so that differential pressure changes have no effect.  Valve is opened
        easily when tagging plug and permits pressure equalization before the plug is released.

      ShallowSetting
       Plug may be set shallow by unjaying with right hand rotation then applying left hand rotation to set
       elements.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 2 از 5 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  5225/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (11/89)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  2 of 5

SUBJECT:  PACKERS: "BOBCAT" RETRIEVABLE BRIDGE PLUG

3.    OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS

      Attaching Running Tool - The Running Tool cannot be latched onto the Bridge Plug by hand because
        of the strong spring fingers in the Finger Bowl. The Running Tool must be assembled on the Bridge
       Plug.

        1.  Unscrew Port Mandrel assembly from Upper Mandrel.

        2.  Place Finger Bowl and Mill Shoe assembly over Trap Sleeve.

        3.  Screw Port Mandrel assembly back into Upper Mandrel. Make up.

        4.  Drive open Equalizing Valve with hammer and wood block.

        5.  Place Valve Ring in position (5 1/2” and 6 5/8” - 7” - 7 5/8” Tools).

        6.  Screw upper Running Tool assembly onto Finger Bowl. Make up.

      Operation of Running Tool - The Running Tool is the means of connecting the Bridge Plug to the
       tubing string.  It is screwed onto the end of the tubing string or onto the bottom of the tool that is to be
       run above the Bridge Plug. The Bridge Plug is latched into the Running Tool. Together with providing
      a connection to the Bridge Plug, the Running Tool also opens and closes the Equalizing Valve on the
       Plug and provides a Mill Shoe to cut up any junk or cement that might be on top of the Bridge Plug.

      The Running Tool is latched onto the Bridge Plug by means of two lugs in the Running Tool that
      engage a “J” Slot on the fishing neck on the Bridge Plug.   It is latched onto the Plug by pushing it on
      and rotating to the right.  It is removed by pushing it down, then picking up, holding left hand torque.

      The spring fingers on the Running Tool perform two functions:

        1.  Close equalizing Valve on Bridge Plug.

        2.  Keep Running Tool lug up in the top part of the “J” Slot while coming out of the hole.

     A shoulder in the Running Tool opens the Equalizing Valve when the Running Tool is latched onto the
       Plug. The spring fingers close the Equalizing Valve as the Running Tool is pulled off of the fishing
       neck.

      The Running Tool lugs must be in the bottom of the “J” Slot for the Running Tool to disengage from the
       Bridge Plug. When coming out of the hole, the spring fingers keep the lugs in the top part of the jay so
        that the Running Tool cannot be accidentally disengaged from the Plug.

      To latch onto the Plug, and in some cases to get off of the Plug in the hole, the spring fingers in the
      Running Tool must be forced down over the Detent Ring on the Port Mandrel of the Plug. About 8000
        lbs of weight is required to force the fingers over the detent. Note: The detent ring should be removed
      from any plug that is to be set where less than 8000 lbs of weight is available to set on it. A thread
        protector should be screwed on in place of the Detent Ring.

     Running in Hole - The Bobcat Retrievable Bridge Plug can be run in the hole at a good rate of speed
      because of its packer element design. Do not let the tubing be turned to the right going in the hole. A
         slight turn put in the tubing a number of times can accumulate enough turns to set the plug. The tubing
       should be picked up several feet about every five stands of pipe while going in hole. Picking up will “re-
        safety” the tool in case the tubing has been turned to the right.

      Setting Packer - If a packer is being run with the bridge plug, safety the packer before setting plug. To
        set plug, move downhole slowly while rotating tubing to the right; three to four turns at the tool are
        required. As soon as the plug takes weight, stop rotating tubing and set down from 10,000 to 15,000
        lbs of weight on the plug to set the packer elements.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 3 از 5 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  5225/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (11/89)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  3 of 5

SUBJECT:  PACKERS: "BOBCAT" RETRIEVABLE BRIDGE PLUG

      Releasing Packer - With 1000 lbs on the plug, turn tubing to the left (1/4 turn required at tool) and pick
       up. As the Running Tool pulls off of the fishing neck it closes the Equalizing Valve. This may require
      as much pull as 5000 lbs.

            If a packer is run with the plug, a check should now be made to make certain the plug and not the
       packer is set. To do this, pick up and safety packer and then go downhole to tag the plug.  If weight is
       slacked off, the plug is set. Come off again as described above.

      The tool is now set and will hold pressure from above or below. Pressure may be applied from above to
      make certain the packer elements are sealing. This is recommended when the tool is set with a small
      amount of weight. The pressure from above further compresses the packer elements and traps this
      movement, thus creating a better pack off.

      Retrieving Packer - Tag tool with 5000 to 10,000 lbs. The Running Tool automatically engages the
        fishing neck and at the same time opens the Equalizing Valve.   If sand, cement, or junk has settled
      down on top of the tool, the Running Tool can be rotated down while circulating to wash the debris
       away. The Mill Shoe on the bottom of the Running Tool cleans the hole down to the packer elements.
      The tubing can be rotated after the Running Tool has engaged the Fishing Neck, since the plug
       mandrel is free to rotate.

        After engaging the fishing neck, pick up with right hand torque and pull 3000 lbs.  Rotate to the right
       holding a strain in the tubing until weight drops off. Continue rotating 15 turns while moving up hole.
      The tubing must be moving up hole while it is turned to safety tool. Pick up ten feet then lower tubing
      down to a spot below where the tool was set to be certain that the tool is safetied up.

      The tool can now be retrieved or moved to another location and set again.

      Detaching Running Tool from Plug - The Running Tool and part of the Bridge Plug must be
       disassembled to remove Running Tool from Plug.

        1.  Unscrew Finger Bowl from upper Running Tool assembly.

        2.  Unscrew mandrel in plug by turning Running Tool upper assembly and backing up on lower end of
            Setting Mandrel. The plug mandrel may break in any one of three places.

            a)  Neck Unscrews from Port Mandrel

                  1.   Pull off upper Running Tool assembly with neck. Remove neck.

                  2.  Remove Equalizing Valve.

                  3.  Unscrew Port Mandrel from Upper Mandrel.

                  4.  Remove Finger Bowl and Mill Shoe assembly.

            b)  Port Mandrel Unscrews from Upper Mandrel

                  1.  Remove Upper Running Tool assembly with neck and Port Mandrel assembly.

                  2.  Disassemble Upper Running Tool assembly from neck.

             c)  Upper Mandrel Unscrews from Setting Mandrel

                  1.  Unscrew Element Retainer from Packing Mandrel. Put back up on Spline Housing.

                  2.   Pull upper part of plug from lower part.

                  3.  Put back up on Upper Mandrel. Unscrew plug mandrel by turning Running Tool.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 4 از 5 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  5225/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (11/89)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  4 of 5

SUBJECT:  PACKERS: "BOBCAT" RETRIEVABLE BRIDGE PLUG

                  4.  Disassemble as described above.

      Shallow Setting - The Bobcat Retrievable Bridge Plug can be set at a shallow depth by setting the
       packer elements with left hand torque.

       Set tool as described. With tool set and before coming off, torque tubing to the left. Enough torque can
      be applied with a 36” pipe wrench to set the packer with no danger of backing off any tubing
       connections.

      Release packer in usual manner.

            If possible, pressure should be applied above the tool to check its seal and to tighten the packer
       elements.

      Note:
     The Detent Ring (located on the Port Mandrel of the Plug) should be removed from any plug that is to
     besetshallowwherethetubingweightislessthan8000lbs.

      The Detent Ring will not allow the Running Tool to detach from the Plug downhole when an insufficient
      amount of weight is available.

      ItemNo.   DescriptionofMainParts

         1       Neck
         3        Port Mandrel
         5        Equalizing Valve
         7       Upper Mandrel
         8       Trap Sleeve
         10       Trap Skirt
         13       Element Retainer
         16       Element
         17       Packing Mandrel
         19       Spline Housing Cap
         20       Spline Housing
         23       Free Piston
         27        Slip Bowl Sleeve
         28        Slip Bowl Assembly
         29        Setting Mandrel
         30       Pin Driv-Lok Type “A”
         33        Slip Rein
         37        Friction Housing Assembly
         39        Friction Pad Spring
         41       Dizzy Nut Assembly
         43      Threaded Insert
         47      End Cap
         48        Setting Mandrel Plug
         49       Plug Adaptor
         51       Retainer Nut
         58       Detent Ring


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 5 از 5 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  5225/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (11/89)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  5 of 5

SUBJECT:  PACKERS: "BOBCAT" RETRIEVABLE BRIDGE PLUG


                                                                   5.30

                                      10.4                         3.75                                 12.8

                                                                   2.50                            25.5
                                                                   4.25
                                                                   5.70
                                                                   4.87                       45.3
                                                                   5.62
                                        2.8                                                                   5.00
                                                                   3.50                                 4.2
                   77.2
                                                                   5.87
                                                                   1.90
                                                                   5.37
                                                                                  8- 5/ 8"          9- 5/ 8"
                                                  SIZE
                                        1.5                                 7.31   7.62    8.31   8.62
                                 3.0
             109.1     10.5                                                                           7.12   7.43    8.12   8.43

                                                                           7.31   7.62    3.31   8.62
                                     WEIGHT
                                                                    40-49#        43-61#
                                                                           24-36#        29-40#

                                                                   7.12




                                        6.7                                                5                                                                      8- / 8" – 1.375
                                                                      9- 5/ 8" – 1.875
                                                                   7.12
                                 24.8

                                                                   2.12
                                                                      8- 5/ 8" – 7.31
                                                                      9- 5/ 8" – 8.21
                                                                   5.40
                                                                   2.80




                                                                                                                                                                      2179/64


