

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 2 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
            UK Operations              Section    :  5227/GEN
             GUIDELINES FOR           Rev.         :  0 (05/96)
BP EXPLORATION   DRILLING OPERATIONS                                                         Page        :  1 of 2

 SUBJECT:  PACKERS: ARROW DLT PACKER, UNLOADER AND STORM VALVE

  1.    INTRODUCTION

       The Arrow DLT packer is a compression set packer with hydraulic hold-down. The hydraulic actuated
        upper slips assure the packer will not move up the hole.

        Since the packer is run with a separate positive lock unloading valve, rather than an integral bypass,
         there is no danger of pumping open a balanced equalising valve.

       The Arrow DLT packer can be used for:

               i)   Pressure testing casing etc.
                ii)  Temporary well suspension.
                iii)  Inflow tests.
            iv)  Cement squeezes, acidising etc.

       The Arrow unloader is a high pressure accessory for the DLT packer, and is run above the packer in the
       open position. After the packer has been run to the required setting depth, and set as per procedure,
         the unloader will automatically close. When run above a DLT or other compression-set packer, the
        unloader is opened by rotating the tubing 1/4 turn and picking up (see Section 5 below).

       An Arrow unloader should not be used when the packer is run with a storm valve.

       The unloader can be run with either a lock open/lock closed or automatic J-slot. The standard is the
         lock open/lock closed J-slot.

  2.    PRE-RUN CHECKS

       Check DLT packer is fully compatible with casing specification and all relevant drilling equipment, wear
        bushings etc.

       Check general condition of DLT packer including elements, slips etc.

       Check operation of J-slot on both DLT packer and unloader.

         Hydraulic calculations must be performed if the packer will be exposed to pressure.

               If storm valve is used the top sub must be unscrewed, threads and O-rings inspected, and reconnected
       hand tight counting the number of turns required to fully engage.

  3.    MAKE-UP GUIDELINES

         Placing the DLT packer, unloader, and storm valve in the rotary table slips should be avoided and must
       be avoided if string weight is more than what is needed to set packer.

       Once made up to the DLT packer, the storm valve top sub must be hand tight only.

        Note:  Packers are heavy and awkward to handle. Do not try to  lift or manoeuvre them without the
                proper equipment or without adequate personnel.

  4.    OPERATING PROCEDURE

               If weight is run below the packer, the unloader will operate as a separate tool to the packer. In this
         case, as the packer takes weight, the torque is held until the unloader is closed. The unloader will not
         function until the tailpipe weight is suspended by the packer.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 2 از 2 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
            UK Operations              Section    :  5227/GEN
             GUIDELINES FOR           Rev.         :  0 (05/96)
BP EXPLORATION   DRILLING OPERATIONS                                                         Page        :  2 of 2

 SUBJECT:  PACKERS: ARROW DLT PACKER, UNLOADER AND STORM VALVE

       Have unloader (if used) in locked open position when running in hole. Avoid right-hand rotation of string
       when making up pipe as this will set packer and close unloader. Pre test packer as soon as possible
        below wellhead.  If packer functions correctly, release pressure, open pipe rams, unset the tool and
         continue to run in hole.

       Run packer 20ft below setting depth recording down string weight. Pick up to setting depth recording up
          string weight. Apply one turn to the right per 3000ft of depth and hold torque. Lower the drillstring to set
        packer and slack off weight of string below packer. When setting the packer, right-hand torque should
       be kept to a minimum. If torque values over 4000ft lbs are required to turn the string, then the string
        should be turned whilst picking up to setting depth.

       The packer is now set with unloader closed (if used).

  5.    TO OPEN UNLOADER

        Turn to the right (1/4 turn required at tool) and hold right-hand torque whilst picking up the string to
         neutral weight at the unloader. Apply ±200psi in string and continue picking up until circulation is
         established. The unloader is now open and the packer set. To reclose unloader hold right-hand torque
       and lower string.

  6.    TO UNSEAT PACKER

        Bleed off all pressure from string. Apply ±300psi to annulus to help upper slips on packer retract, then
        bleed off pressure. Open unloader as described above. Pick up string to unset packer and pause for
       5 to 10 minutes to allow elements to relax. Pull out of hole.

  7.    STORM VALVE OPERATIONS

      A storm valve provides a means of disconnecting the drillpipe or tubing close to the surface without
          tripping the entire string. The storm valve remains closed, providing a secure seal until the drillpipe is
         reconnected.

          After setting packer at desired depth, pick up to zero weight at storm valve. Rotate string to the left to
         release storm valve

        Note:  No torque should be seen.

          After 12 turns the valve is closed, after 21 turns (or number of turns experienced during pre-job checks)
         the valve is fully disengaged. The storm valve/packer can now be pressure tested up to 3000psi.

       To retrieve storm valve and DLT packer RIH with valve top sub and carefully tag storm valve with
       1000 lbs. During reconnect be prepared to handle pressure from the drillpipe and casing side. Rotate to
         the right monitoring torque.

        Note:  Do not apply more than 2000ft lbs torque at tool.

          After two to three turns pick up ±3000 lbs to see  if threads have engaged.  If threads are engaged
         continue to rotate to the right (valve open after 12 turns) until a total of 20 to 21 turns has been applied.
       The storm valve is now fully engaged.

  8.    MAINTENANCE

       One of the biggest causes of problems with downhole tools is poor or no maintenance between runs.
         This is particularly true for storm valves which can easily become plugged and seized with misuse.

          After each run the packer must be redressed by trained Dowell personnel.


