

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 2 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6050/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  0 (9/90)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  1 of 2

SUBJECT:  JAR PLACEMENT AND JARRING PRACTICES

1.    JARRING

     Two phenomena have to be considered when jarring: a) impact; and b) impulse.

      The impact force must be high enough to break the binding forces causing the pipe to stick and that
       force must act long enough to move the fish.  This is termed the impulse force.  Both forces are
       influenced by the amount of drill collars placed above the jar.

      The smaller the quantity of drill collars placed above the jar, the higher the impact force. Conversely,
       the larger the quantity of drill collars above the jar, the greater the impulse. Clearly a compromise has
        to be reached where impact and impulse are operating together to reach the common objective, i.e. to
        free the stuck pipe.

     A comprehensive report has been published, “A Review of Jar Placement”, which discusses the theory
      and practicalities of correct jar positioning. This report should be read and used in conjunction with the
     JARPRO computer guide to optimise jar placement and to check on loadings available from various
          jar/drill collar combinations. Copies of both documents can be obtained from the fields’ SDEs.

2.    JARS AND JARRING PRACTICES

       There are two types of jars: mechanical and hydraulic.

       Mechanical jars are preset at surface. Hydraulic jars are adjustable for overpull downhole.  In general,
      an increase in jar stroke length increases both impact and impulse. With these obvious advantages, a
       long stroke, hydraulic jar should always be used if possible.

2.1    Jar Placement

      3 - 4 drill collars should be placed above the jar. BHA components should not be mixed, e.g. if using 8”
           drill collars below the jar, use 8” collars above.  If the BHA has to be modified, e.g. to reduce differential
        sticking, consider running 6 1/4” collars instead of HWDP. Jarring performance will be reduced if there
         is a large difference between the collar/HWDP size above and below the jar. Do not drill with the jars at
         their neutral point. A minimum of 5,000 lbs tension or down-weight should be used.

2.2   The Effects of Circulating When Jarring

     When circulating, pump open forces greatly influence jarring performance and have to be carefully
       considered.

        a)   Jarring Up with a Hydraulic Jar:

             Circulating makes the jar harder to cock but when the jar does trip both impact and impulse forces
           are increased. To be confident that the jars are cocked, slack off more weight or stop circulating.

        b)   Jarring Up with a Mechanical Jar:

         The jar will trip with less overpull and is harder to cock.

        c)   Jarring Down with a Hydraulic or Mechanical Jar:

         The effects are less easily identified and circulating does not influence impact values. Cocking the
             jars is easier but the jar is harder to trip.

3.    JARRING PRACTICES

        Visually check derrick for loose fittings.  All personnel to be kept clear of derrick and drill floor when
         jarring. As a rule of thumb, jar up going in the hole and jar down when pulling out. Uncock the jar


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 2 از 2 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6050/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  0 (9/90)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  2 of 2

SUBJECT:  JAR PLACEMENT AND JARRING PRACTICES

       before working pipe in tight hole. When drilling with the jars in compression, uncock the jar before
      making a connection. This will prevent any sudden, unplanned upward jarring.

     When jarring, overpull to the maximum figure to trip the jar, wait for the jar to trip THEN increase the
        overpull to that recommended for the pipe.  If the string is overpulled to the maximum recommended for
       the pipe before the jar has tripped, severe overloading of the jar may occur causing catastrophic failure
        of the jar.

     When the drill string is initially stuck, start jarring with 40 - 50,000 lbs overpull above that to trip the jar.
       Increase overpull to maximum over a one hour period.


