

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 24 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6150/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  5 (10/92)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  1 of 24

SUBJECT:  FREE POINT DETERMINATION AND BACK-OFF PROCEDURES


                                                                         NO  ?         YES
                                                                                                                                        Free
                                                                                                                                                                                                           String




                                                                           to  (3)
                                                                                                                                                  Pipe   14
                                                                                                                                                         Left                                                                                                                                                                                           POOHString                                                                                                                                                  Work                                                                                                                                                            Page                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ReTorque


                                                                              NO


                                  ?
                                                               Wt.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            whilst                                                                                                                         String                                                                                                                                  YES  Move                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Wireline                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Clean                                                                                                                                                                            Down                                                                                                                                                                                              Wireline                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Back-Off                                                                                                                                                                                          Circ                                                                                                                                                                                Charge                 String                                                                                                                                                             Charge                                                                                                                                                   Neutral                                                                                                                                 RigWireline                                                                                                                                                                                                 Circ,                                                                                                                                                                                              Hole                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            String                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CorrelationBack-Offfor                                                                                                                         Adjust                                                                                                                  Fire                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Backed-Off                                          to                                                                                                                       Final                                                                                                                                                                 POOH




                                                                         (9)
                                           in                                                                                          Hand 18                                                                                       Work    Torque                                                                                          Left  Page

                                                                                                                                                               Back-Off    Depth                                                                                                                            Chargeto
                                                           Run

                           YES


                                                                    for                                  Jars     NO                                                 String                                                13                                                                                                                 rightMake-Up(5)                                                            Back-Off                                             tod.p.Page                                          above                                                                    Torque


                           YES                                        YES                                                                                      YES
                                                                          Point
                                               (7)        ?                                Neutral                     ?    NO                 Charge                        String                                                                                                                                                                                                         String            ?
                                                                 on              &Free                               14                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Charge                                                                                 Run    Depth                              Jars                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Correlation                                                                                                                                                                  Back-Off                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   possible                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  StringFree      PIPE                                                         to         Max                                                                     if                                                          Working     NO      DeterminePoint                                         Ispossible                              atpage    STUCK                                                                                                                                                               Fire                                                                                                                                                                                                  Final                                                        FreeWeight                                                                                                           Severance                PullPressurise

                                                                                                          NO





                                               ?

                                                                                                                                       Did               Time                                                                                        NO                   Equipmentperform                                                         Inventory       Severance                     Optimum                                      6005/GEN                           Fishing                                                                                          Explosives                                                                                                                            YES                   RigFPI/Back-Off                                        Tools

      FREE POINT, BACK-OFF & SEVERANCE OPERATIONS FLOWCHART


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 2 از 24 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6150/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  5 (10/92)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  2 of 24

SUBJECT:  FREE POINT DETERMINATION AND BACK-OFF PROCEDURES

Find the free point and determine the connection to be backed off by either:

1)  Stretch Test.
2)  Free point indicator run on wireline.

When the connection to be "backed off" has been determined, the procedure to back off either with or without
the help of an explosive charge will be advised from the Shore Base.

1.    The Stretch Test is only used in straight hole and can only be applied on semi-submersible units if there
         is no significant heave.  It is an inaccurate method of determining the stuck point and should be used as
      a rough guide only.

     When doing the stretch test:

        1.  Mark the string at the rotary table "A", the string pull should be the weight of the string in air.

        2.   Pull additional tension and measure the stretch in the string by the rise of the mark from the rotary
             table. Mark the pipe at the rotary table "B".

        3.  Lower the string to the original Martin Decker reading. Re-mark the pipe at the rotary table "C".
           This mark will be different from the original starting mark.

        4.   Pull the same additional tension as in 2, and again measure the stretch, re-mark the pipe at the
             rotary table "D".

        5.  Measure the distance from:

         The mid-point of the bottom two marks

               to:

            the mid-point of the upper two marks.

          Mark D

          Mark B

                                                                    "e"

          Mark C

          Mark A

         The distance "e" will be the stretch of the pipe.

        6.  The relationship between stretch and free length will be:

           L1  =  E x e x Wdp
                       40.8 P

           where:  E    =  Modulus of elasticity = 30 x 106
                  e    =   Differential stretch (inches)
              Wdp  =  Weight per foot of pipe in air (lbs/ft)
               P    =   Differential pull (lbs)

          Note the stretch test is accurate only to 200 - 300 ft (60 - 90m) in deeper holes and less accurate in
           shallow holes.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 3 از 24 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6150/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  5 (10/92)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  3 of 24

SUBJECT:  FREE POINT DETERMINATION AND BACK-OFF PROCEDURES

2.    FREE POINT DETERMINATION AND BACK-OFF PROCEDURES

      To accomplish a successful back-off an understanding of why the string got stuck, knowledge of the
       borehole shape and all past and present hole problem areas is required. Armed with this information
      and careful interpretation of the free point indicator results will help to achieve a successful operation.

            If the decision to back-off has been taken  it is strongly recommended that a free point indicator (FPI)
        tool should always be run to determine the stuck point.  If the jars in the assembly are still stroking and
              it has been decided to back-off at or above the jar, then there is no need to run the FPI. Check the jar
        tensile rating - "necking" of the jar mandrel can occur when applying large overpulls.  If necking occurs
              it may prevent passage of wireline tools through the jar.

      The FPI can measure stretch and torque.   It should be possible to back-off pipe when torque and
        stretch measurements indicate 80 - 85% of free pipe readings.

3.    FREE POINT INDICATOR TOOLS

        Electric logging free point indicators require the string to be tensioned and torqued, thereby activating
       the tool's strain gauges.  In general, back off attempts will be made on the lowest connection where
       torque and stretch readings are 80% to 85% of free pipe.

      The Drilling Supervisor should familiarise himself with the operation of the logging contractor's tools.

      The following text explains Schlumberger's FPI tools.

3.1    SIT-C (Stuck Point Indicator Tool)

       This tool is anchored to the inside of the pipe with 2 sets of bowspring anchors spaced approximately 4
        feet apart. The tool is suited for use in shallow wells where heaving of the drilling vessel may cause
       slippage of the tool. The bowsprings can move up the pipe with the heave without damage. There is
       the facility to include "slip joints" in the tool suite to compensate for vessel heave. The bowsprings
       diameter is changed by adjusting the holding nuts on either side of the spring. To take measurements
         in drill pipe and drill collars the wireline has to be tripped and the bowsprings adjusted at surface.

       Stretch and right-hand torque can be measured. The results are defined by measuring the air gap
      between 2 magnets after the pipe has been put under tension or torque. The tool cannot distinguish
      between stretch and torque, thus all residual torque or stretch must be out of the pipe before further
      measurements are made.

3.2    SIT-F

       This tool is equipped with 2 sets of hydraulically operated arms spaced approximately 4 feet apart.
      Each set has 3 arms. Each arm's tip is coated with hard facing which prevents slippage of the tool.  If
      measurements have to be made inside drill pipe and drill collars the wireline has to be tripped and the
      arms changed at surface to accommodate the different ID's.

      The principle of operation is identical to the SIT-C above.

3.3    FPIT (Free Point Indicator Tool)

       This tool has 2 sets of hydraulically operated arms as in the SIT-F tool. Arms can be installed to anchor
         in ID's ranging from tubing up to 17 1/2" casing. The hydraulic force holding the arms to the inside of
       the pipe is substantially greater than in the SIT-F tool.

       There are 2 sensors, one for measuring stretch and one for measuring both RH and LH torque. The
        principle of measurement involves Kelvin transfer:  measuring the field between 2 receivers and a
        transmitter.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 4 از 24 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6150/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  5 (10/92)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  4 of 24

SUBJECT:  FREE POINT DETERMINATION AND BACK-OFF PROCEDURES

     A combination FPI measurement and back-off charge run can be made with the FPIT tool, see page 17
         for chart. This assembly has limited application. See Section 8 - Running the Back-Off Charge.

      Note:
       AllSchlumbergertoolsare1.375"OD.

      The following text explains Atlas FPI tools.

3.4    Atlas FPI Tool (2501)

        Atlas use three types of FPI. The Atlas freepoint indicator comes in 5 separate sections. Two motor
        sections, one sensor, one electronics and one ccl section, i.e:

       Bottom-Motor-Sensor-Electronics-Motor-CCL-Top

      The tool will lock itself firmly in place with the tungsten carbide tipped anchors and can be used in all
       sizes of drillpipe. The design of the tool, slick, makes  it ideal for both low and highly deviated holes.
     Pump down is possible. The logging cable can be totally slacked off while performing readings. A real
       time ccl and freepoint (freepipe percentage) log will be recorded in the field.

      Note:
     2501FPItool1.300"OD.

3.5   The AES FPI Tool (2502)

      The AES freepoint indicator comes in 5 separate sections. Two anchor sections (bow springs), one
       sensor section, one ccl, one slip joint, i.e:

       Bottom-Anchor-Sensor-Anchor-CCL-Slip Joint-Top

      The tool is supplied with its own panel (2504), the tool locks itself in place with tungsten carbide tipped
       bowspring anchors. The tool is designed for hostile environment wells and does not contain electronic
       components. The bowspring anchors must be set up for pipe ID +0.5". Two sizes of slip joint are
        available, 3 ft and 9 ft length, to compensate for heave and cable slack.

      The best results for this tool are achieved in deviations of less than 45 deg. The tool is not
     recommendedforholeanglesgreaterthan60deg.

      Note:
     2502FPItool1.375"OD.

3.6   The Magnatector FPI Tool (2515)

      The Magnatector freepoint indicator comes in one piece. The tool is always supplied with its own panel
        (2509). The tool locks itself in place with surface powered electromagnets. The design of the tool,
         slick, makes it ideal for high deviation wells, pump down is possible. The magnets will lock the tool in
     ANY SIZE OF DRILLPIPE OR CASING. The logging cable can be totally slacked off while taking
       readings.

      Note:
     2515FPItool1.438"OD.

3.7    Surface Checks

      2501 FPI

        1)  Operate arms check/set for appropriate max. diameter.
        2)  Check sensor for response under tension/compression, LH/RH torque.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 5 از 24 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6150/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  5 (10/92)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  5 of 24

SUBJECT:  FREE POINT DETERMINATION AND BACK-OFF PROCEDURES

        3)  Check CCL.

      2502 FPI

        1)  Set bowsprings for pipe ID plus 0.5".
        2)  Check sensor response under, tens/compression, LH/RH torque.
        3)  Check CCL.

      2515 FPI

        1)  Activate magnets against metal surface.
        2)  Check sensor response under, tens/compression, LH/RH torque.

      Note:
       All these Atlas tools will record stretch or torque but cannot distinguish between them. All tools are
      maintenancefreewhileontherig.

4.    MECHANICAL SURFACE CHECKS FOR ALL TOOLS

4.1    The SIT-C and the SIT-F tools have oil filled diaphragms to compensate for hydrostatic pressure. The
       diaphragms have to be properly filled prior to running the tool.  Incorrect oil-level is the most common
      cause of failure. The FPIT tool has no diaphragm.

4.2    Operate the arms and check maximum diameter with ring gauge.

4.3   On bowsprings, set diameter to 1/2" to 3/4" greater than pipe to be measured and check same against
      a ring gauge.

5.    INTERPRETATION OF FREE POINT INDICATOR RESULTS

      The free point is selected as the deepest point at which the pipe can be backed-off and recovered.
       Both stretch and torque readings are required to make absolutely sure the pipe is free. The pipe may
      be free in torque but not in stretch, e.g. when a stabiliser has a rock lodged above it.

       Careful and thorough interpretation of the free point indicator results has to be made. The most
     common fault is not to take enough time to work the torque down to the measurement point. In the past
      odd readings obtained when using FPI tools were blamed on the tool slipping in the pipe whilst the
      measurements were being taken.   It is highly unlikely that the FPI tools are slipping inside the pipe, if
       the anchors are deployed and there is sufficient cable slack.

5.1   Examples in Interpretation of Different Hole Geometries

      The following diagrams illustrate the hole conditions and the stretch and torque readings of typical FPI
       runs to determine the free point.  If the stretch and torque readings are 80 - 85% of free pipe, back-off, if
       performed correctly, is certain.

       For a successful back-off 3 conditions are absolutely essential:

        a)  Neutral Weight at Connection to be Backed Off

           This weight has to be carefully calculated accounting for hole friction or as observed using FPIT
             tools (see page 15, para. 7.8).

        b)  Correct Amount of LH Torque at Connection to be Backed Off

          Time has to be taken to work in the torque and positive indications observed that the torque is
           going downhole and being applied to the connection to be backed off. When taking the initial


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 6 از 24 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6150/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  5 (10/92)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  6 of 24

SUBJECT:  FREE POINT DETERMINATION AND BACK-OFF PROCEDURES

             stretch and torque readings to determine the free point, an indication will have been gained as to
           the degree of difficulty in getting torque down to any particular connection.   If the pipe can be
           torqued up to the right, then the pipe can be torqued to the left to the same degree. (For the back-
               off, LH torque should not exceed 80% of the make-up torque.)  In top-drive units, rig up wireline
           through gooseneck bull plug access or remove gooseneck and washpipe. Working pipe to get LH
            or RH torque down to the free point is far easier and more safely done with the top-drive connected
             to the drill string.

        c)  Correct Quantity of Primer Strands for Back-Off Explosive

           Figure 6 on page 18, indicating the correct quantity of primer chord to be used, should be referred
             to when making up the explosive charge.

      The following 4 stuck pipe examples give an idea how difficult  it can be to accurately interpret FPI
       readings in both stretch and torque. Care should be taken when carrying out the initial FPI readings.
      They can give a good indication of hole drag and the ability to transmit torque downhole.  This is
        essential when selecting the correct neutral weight prior to backing off the joint. The temptation to
       attempt to back-off 1 or 2 joints below the identified free point should be firmly resisted.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 7 از 24 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6150/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  5 (10/92)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  7 of 24

SUBJECT:  FREE POINT DETERMINATION AND BACK-OFF PROCEDURES

     FIGURE 1

        Straight hole, straight pipe. Stuck in drill collars.


                PIPE SKETCH                    PULL & TORQUE

                                       % OF FREE PIPE READING
                                 DEPTH
                                                              0    10    20    30    40    50    60    70    80    90  100
                                        PULL
                                     TORQUE




                          DRILLDRILL PIPEPIPE





                          DRILLDRILL
                        COLLARSCOLLARS


                           BACK-OFFBACK-OFF
                         HEREHERE





                                                      VERY POOR            POOR   GOOD
                                                               BACK-OFF CHANGES

                                                                                                                           911208/3


       Both stretch and torque readings confirm the stuck point is in the same drill collar. Where there is little
        wall friction, a sharp drop-off in both readings is observed below the free point.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 8 از 24 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6150/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  5 (10/92)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  8 of 24

SUBJECT:  FREE POINT DETERMINATION AND BACK-OFF PROCEDURES

     FIGURE 2

         Differentially or stuck by heaving, sloughing formation.


               PIPE SKETCH                    PULL & TORQUE

                                       % OF FREE PIPE READING                                DEPTH
                                                             0    10    20    30    40    50    60    70    80    90  100
                                        PULL
                                    TORQUE

                   A                          BACK-OFFBACK-OFF
                        HEREHERE




                     B





                   C





                   D





                                                     VERY POOR            POOR   GOOD
                                                               BACK-OFF CHANGES

                                                                                                                          911208/4


      To stretch or torque the pipe becomes more difficult as depth below the free point increases. The FPIT
       decreases rapidly below collar B, the pipe should be backed-off either at collar A or collar B.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 9 از 24 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6150/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  5 (10/92)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  9 of 24

SUBJECT:  FREE POINT DETERMINATION AND BACK-OFF PROCEDURES

     FIGURE 3

        Straight hole, bent pipe.


               PIPE SKETCH                    PULL & TORQUE

                                       % OF FREE PIPE READING                                DEPTH
                                                             0    10    20    30    40    50    60    70    80    90  100
                                        PULL
                                    TORQUE



                    COLLARCOLLAR AA


                          BACK-OFFBACK-OFF
                        HEREHERE
                    COLLARCOLLAR BB

                     FREEFREE POINTPOINT



                    COLLARCOLLAR CC




                    COLLARCOLLAR DD




                    COLLARCOLLAR EE





                                                     VERY POOR            POOR   GOOD
                                                               BACK-OFF CHANGES

                                                                                                                          911208/5


            It is difficult to obtain normal torque readings in a badly bent string. Normal stretch and torque for this
        string are read above collar B. Below collar B, stretch is normal but torque reading is decreasing with
       increasing depth. Normal torque readings can often be obtained below collar B by applying an overpull
      on the pipe.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 10 از 24 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6150/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  5 (10/92)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  10 of 24

SUBJECT:  FREE POINT DETERMINATION AND BACK-OFF PROCEDURES

     FIGURE 4

      Crooked or deviated holes.


                  PIPE SKETCH                         PULL & TORQUE

                                             % OF FREE PIPE READING                                     DEPTH
                                                                    0     10     20     30     40     50     60     70     80     90   100
                                            PULL
                                        TORQUE      A





                                                 B





                                    C





                          DD





                   EE




                   ATTEMPTATTEMPT
                    BACK-OFFBACK-OFF
               F     HEREHERE



                                                             VERY POOR             POOR    GOOD
                                                                       BACK-OFF CHANGES

                                                                                                                                          911208/6


        In deviated wells it is normally possible to transmit torque deeper than stretch. The torque reading is
        often a function of the pull on pipe.  Generally best torque transmission is obtained at relatively low
       values of pull. Some judgement must be exercised in what can be backed-off. While a back-off may at
       times be made with less than 25% stretch reading, it is useless to attempt a back-off without a torque
       reading of at least 50% of free pipe.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 11 از 24 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6150/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  5 (10/92)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  11 of 24

SUBJECT:  FREE POINT DETERMINATION AND BACK-OFF PROCEDURES

6.    PRE-JOB PLANNING AND GENERAL DISCUSSION ON FREE POINT AND BACK-OFF
     OPERATIONS

6.1    Rig Floor Safety and Precautions

      The following equipment should be checked to ensure a safe Rig Floor operation:

        a)  Tong and slip dies. These must be sharp, clean and of the correct size to bite and hold the pipe,
             kelly or whatever part of the string protrudes above the rotary.

        b)  Tong snub lines and jerk lines. When a jerk line must be used to apply left-hand torque instead of
          a reverse gear on the rotary, be certain that  it is in perfect condition and is long enough to allow
            several wraps on the cathead with plenty of rope remaining to be easily handled. Snub lines on the
           tongs should be double cables and in good condition.

        c)   Slip handles. Tie the slip handles together with a strong piece of soft line. This is done because it
               is possible for the pipe to break high when back torque is being applied.  If this should happen, the
           pipe may part completely and jump due to the strain. The slips would be thrown clear and become
          a dangerous projectile.

        d)  Block, hook and elevator. When applying torque, the elevators should be latched around the pipe
          and slacked off below the tool joint, so that the pipe can rotate freely through the elevators. The
          hook is locked when the pipe is being rotated while sitting on the slips.

        e)  Residual torque. Make sure that no residual torque remains in the string of pipe when it is picked
          up out of the slips, unless it is being held by the tong.  If residual torque is present, it will spin out
          and wrap up the logging line and hoisting equipment.

6.2   Running FPI Tools and Interpretation of Collected Data

     A BHA and drill string diagram is filled in Figure 7, page 20, with all troublesome hole areas highlighted.
      The driller should be consulted as to the exact time and hole conditions when the string became
         irretrievably stuck.  Highlight the hole geometry, particularly at kick-off depths and to make known the
       borehole's past and present problem areas.

6.2.1  Produce an assembly drawing with DC numbered.

6.2.2  Make up tabulation as follows:


                                                     Initial    Final
                                            Pull      Pull   Meter %  RH/LH                  Meter %
               Conn.               x 1000  x 1000   Points   Turns                    Points
        Time    No.   Size  Depth     (lb)       (lb)    (Stretch)   Put In  Amps  Torque  (Torque)





6.2.3  Always take tension readings prior to torque readings especially in deviated wells. For deviated holes,
       both stretch and torque readings should be done to determine whether the pipe is free or not.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 12 از 24 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6150/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  5 (10/92)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  12 of 24

SUBJECT:  FREE POINT DETERMINATION AND BACK-OFF PROCEDURES

6.2.4  The same overpull increment (normally 50,000 lbs) should be used when determining the free point at
      each reading.

6.2.5  Take two or more readings at the same spot by applying the selected weight increment without slacking
          off. Each increment may not necessarily give the same reading.  In a deviated hole you will get low
       reading bottom side - good reading centre of hole and decreasing again as string is pulled to top side of
        hole.

6.2.6  Tension should be worked down the string by applying the surface overpull determined to give the
       required overpull increment at the tool depth, and then slacking off to the neutral weight at the tool
       depth.  This should be repeated 4 or 5 times, until the FPI gives consistent readings. Make sure that
       the total overpull applied when taking a reading is well above the string weight.

6.2.7  As can be seen from the "Stretch reading scale" (page 21), the stretch reading is not a linear function of
       the overpull.  This implies that larger overpull increments only give marginal increases in stretch
        reading.  For example:  Stretch measure in HWDP at 50 lb/ft with a 50,000 overpull increment gives
       according to the stretch chart a reading of 80 meter points.  This is the case in any weight range,
       whether it be 100,000 lbs to 150,000 lbs or 300,000 lbs to 350,000 lbs.

6.2.8    If the reading in the above case would actually be only say 65 meter points and one is certain that at
         this point the string is free, then a line drawn on the chart from 50 lbs/ft pipe weight through 65 meter
       points gives an actual overpull at this point of 30,000 lbs (refer to page 21).  This indicates the
      importance of taking a calibration reading at a point in the string that is known to be free, in
       order to get an idea of friction in the hole. Assume now that a stretch reading is taken in the drill collars
       weighing 150 lbs/ft situated below the HWDP. When a 50,000 lbs increment is applied the actual
        overpull is 30,000 lbs therefore a reading of 32 meter points can be expected if the string is free.

      The calibration point should be in the same type of BHA component as that which is stuck - if the type
        of stuck component is possible to determine.

6.3    Working Torque Downhole

      Note:
        It at all possible rig up wireline tools and explosive charges through top-drive. It is far easier to transmit
      torquedownholewhenworkingpipewithtop-drive.

        1.  When the FPI tool is in the hole, careful consideration of the transmittal of RH torque will indicate
          what Martin Decker weight range is the most efficient and how many turns at surface are
            required to transmit any torque to the connection to be backed off.

        2.   In STRAIGHT wells the weight of string to the back-off point can be calculated using various
           parameters.

                i.e.     i)   Weight of string in air to back-off connection.
                                ii)  Weight of string in mud + 10%.
                                 iii)  Recorded string weight up less the weight in mud of the pipe to be left in hole.
                       iv) As indicated by the FPI.

        3.  When working in left hand torque, the slack-off and pick-up weights should be adjusted to give the
           best indications that the torque is being transmitted downhole.

         Note:
             Ifjarsstillworking,donotslackoffenoughweighttoenablethejarstorework.

             a)  When the top-drive is used to rotate the pipe, careful monitoring of amps versus turns must
              be done. Bear in mind the large power input of the top drive.  Start slowly with 2 LH turns
              and work the pipe between 20k overpull and actual FPI or calculated MD weight at the
                  neutral point. Monitor the drop-off in top drive motor amps as the torque is worked downhole.
                             If amp drop-off is difficult to achieve, vary the slack-off and pick-up weights to achieve the


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 13 از 24 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6150/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  5 (10/92)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  13 of 24

SUBJECT:  FREE POINT DETERMINATION AND BACK-OFF PROCEDURES

                 quickest response from the amp meter.  Patience is required,  it can take several hours to
               work torque down to the free point, especially in deviated wells. Continue rotating the pipe
              one turn at a time and working the pipe for each turn.

             b)  When using the rotary table to rotate the pipe, strict adherence to safety considerations must
              be done, as outlined in Section 6.1.  Initially rotate the string 2 turns to the left.  Adjust the
                tong line on the back-up post to give maximum up and down travel. Have a torque line pull
              gauge connected to the tong. Hold the torque in the string with the make-up tong and work
                 the string initially as in a) above. Monitor the decrease in line pull ft.lbs and adjust the slack-
                     off and pick-up weights to give the quickest response. Working the string with the Kelly or
                 blocks has the disadvantage that only 4 ft to 5 ft of movement is possible due to the length
              and travel of the tong line.  Again patience is required to complete winding in LH torque.
             Good results have been achieved in the past after spending up to 2 hours on this operation.

              c)  When the back-off charge has been fired, the minimum weight to work in additional LH torque
                        is:

                             i)  The recorded weight down less the weight of string to be left in hole.

                               ii)  The weight that corresponds to the best torque response.

        4.  The amount of reverse torque to be applied depends on the type, size, depth and condition of the
           pipe and no firm rules can be given, but a general recommendation is as follows:

                Drill Pipe from:

              0' - 4000' (1200m)                   -  Use 1/4 to 1/2 round per 1000' (300m).

           4000' (1220m) - 9000' (2700m)  -  Use 1/2 to 3/4 round per 1000' (300m).

           9000' (2700m) - Plus                -  Use 3/4 to 1 round per 1000' (300m).

          Max. surface torque to be 80% of DP make-up torque.

        5.  When the position of the back-off has been decided, torque up the string to the right and work this
           torque down. Record the amp reading or torque readings. Never exceed 80% of this figure when
            giving the string left hand torque.

        6.  Apply 2-3 turns of left hand torque, required for the back-off, and lock the rotary. Use a jerk line
          and the rotary tongs, with tong gauge attached, to pull off the rotary lock and hold. Pick the string
               off the slips and work the pipe vertically a few times, set pipe back on slips, pull tongs to relock the
             rotary.  If it is felt that the pipe will accept the remaining left hand torque, apply it.  If not, then apply
             half the remaining torque and repeat the above procedure until the required amount of left hand
           torque is in the pipe.

            Frequently, if LH torque is applied with the rotary table, the string breaks at an unintended position.
             In this case, use the rotary to apply the first portion of the left hand torque, and complete the
            operation, using the rotary tongs.

        7.  Should the pipe back off uphole in casing, it generally does not damage the cable.  If, however, the
           pipe backs off mechanically while cable is in the open hole, the pipe should be lifted up
           approximately thirty feet and the tool pulled well above this point, before the connection is remade.

6.4    Completing the Back-Off

      The back-off refers to separating the free pipe from the stuck pipe at a threaded connection just above
       the free point.  It is accomplished by placing an explosive charge across this connection by means of a
       casing collar locator, while reverse or left hand torque is applied. When the charge is fired, the
       connection "breaks".


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 14 از 24 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6150/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  5 (10/92)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  14 of 24

SUBJECT:  FREE POINT DETERMINATION AND BACK-OFF PROCEDURES

      The three requirements for a successful back-off, in order of importance are:

        1.  The explosive charge must be large enough to break the connection.

         Note:
        Too high a number of strands can damage the pin and box, thus preventing reconnection of fishing
            jars.

        2.   Sufficient reverse or left hand torque must be applied.

        3.  The proper weight condition at the point of back-off must be obtained.

      The back-off charge can be run immediately the FPI is pulled. With the potential for premature back-off
       high up in the string, the charge is often run to ± 3000 ft (900m) above the back-off point whereupon the
       remainder of the LH torque is applied to the string. In semi-submersible operations, the charge is run 1
         joint below the connection to be backed off - this saves time when correlating on depths - less time for
      heave conditions to deteriorate.

        After the string shot has been detonated, recover the charge and check for back-off.   If the required
       connection has not backed-off completely at this point, then further LH torque can be applied to fully
      unscrew the thread as follows:

       Reset the string weight as required.

            i)   Apply approximately half of the original amount of left hand torque used to the pipe.  While the
           torque is being applied, the pipe should back off as evidenced by a loss of torque load.   If not,
           release the left hand torque, noting any loss of torque in the process.

             ii)    If the torque was lost, repeat the above process until the back-off is complete.

              iii)  When no torque is lost during the process, the weight is usually not correct.  Slowly adjust the
           weight up or down while checking the tong line. At the correct weight, the torque load will relax.

          iv)  After a total back-off,  if desired, check the depth of the parted pipe by pulling the pipe 5 to 10 ft
           (1.5m to 3m), setting the slips and checking the point of back-off with the collar locator, but in the
          case of differential sticking, keep pipe moving at all times.

7.    OPERATIONAL PROCEDURE FOR RUNNING FPI TOOLS

      Complete BHA sheet, Figure 7.

7.1    Lock swivel and blocks.

7.2       If drilling jars are not stuck, uncock same. For the complete operation do not go below slack-off weight
       required to re-cock jars.

7.3    Complete surface checks on FPI tool outlined in Section 4.

7.4   Run FPI tool into drill pipe. Depending on the installation the tools can be introduced into the drill pipe
         in several ways as illustrated in Figure 10.

        a)  Top-drive or Kelly. Remove bull plug on top of gooseneck or remove complete gooseneck/
          washpipe assembly.

         Note:
             Install wireline protector into washpipe entry area. If none available, fabricate same. Be extra
           carefulnottodropdebrisdownstring!


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 15 از 24 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6150/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  5 (10/92)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  15 of 24

SUBJECT:  FREE POINT DETERMINATION AND BACK-OFF PROCEDURES

        b)    If the rig is equipped with long casing links, the cable and IBOP equipment can be rigged up as
              illustrated in Figure 10.

         Note:
       When running FPI, it is not necessary to compensate the cable for vessel heave. Once the
          anchoring mechanism has been deployed, the cable is slacked off 10 - 15 feet to compensate for
          vesselmovement.

7.5       If the string is stuck below the jars, calibrate the tool in the collar above jar (Ref. 6.2.8). From the
        calibration run,  if free pipe gives a meter reading of 85%, then an estimation of hole friction can be
      made. This is important later on in the back-off operation when the neutral weight has to be found for
       the connection to be backed off.

7.6     Position the FPI tool in mid-joint and deploy the anchoring mechanism.  Take stretch readings from
        neutral weight in area of interest with 50K overpull increments.  Continue taking stretch readings and
       ascertain at what depth stretch is good or bad. To save time,  if the jars are free, the first stretch
      measurement should be taken above and below the top stabiliser.

7.7   When the stretch is deteriorating, take torque readings to confirm stretch. One RH turn per 1000 ft to
       the point of interest is made. The torque may have to be worked down. With the SIT C and F tools,
         this is a disadvantage as these tools cannot differentiate between stretch and torque. The following
       technique can be done to determine whether torque can be transmitted downhole and can be
      measured by the SIT C and F tools.

        a)   After stretch measurements, with 5-10K overpull on string, set FPI tool in mid joint.

        b)  Put all RH turns into pipe.

        c)  Set meter on SIT panel to 80 meter points (full scale deflection).

        d)  Watch the meter.   If the reading decreases,  it means the torque is coming out of the pipe, thus
           torque is being transmitted to that point, i.e. the pipe is free.  This is an excellent indicator in
           gauging how easy or difficult it will be to put LH torque into the string for the back-off.

7.8    The neutral weight can be determined with the FPIT before pulling the tool as outlined below.

        In deviated wells, it is often impossible to calculate the correct weight to pull to ensure neutral weight at
       the connection to be backed off. Buoyancy, friction in the hole and weight of pipe laying on the low side
          will have an indeterminate effect upon the calculated and actual Martin Decker pull required. A more
       accurate method of determining neutral weight in deviated holes is to measure the neutral weight
         directly with the FPI tool:

        a)   Instruct the driller to compress the pipe with 50,000 lbs below the estimated neutral weight at the
             tool depth. (Do not go below weight which will cock jars.)

        b)  Set the FPI tool.

        c)   Instruct the driller to pick up in 10,000 lbs steps.

        d)  Record all FPI readings on the worksheet and plot them out as in Figure 5.

        e)  The neutral weight is halfway between the first FPI deflection and the point where the increase
         becomes clear.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 16 از 24 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6150/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  5 (10/92)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  16 of 24

SUBJECT:  FREE POINT DETERMINATION AND BACK-OFF PROCEDURES




                                         Curve Becomes
                                                    Linear                                                                                FPI Response





                                            Neutral
            FPI                             Point
          Reading



                          FPI Response
                           Begins



                                                                    Drill Pipe Tension

                        FIGURE 5



            It should, however, be understood that even maximum string tension would result in an overpull at a
        neutral point that is small in comparison to the parting force produced by a back-off explosion. As a
       general rule, when attempting to position the neutral point err on the side of overpull rather than
      compression, thereby limiting the potential for a connection above the required back-off point
        preferentially parting. By careful observation of the tool readings the free point indicator can indicate
        pulls and torque required to overcome friction.  It is, therefore, essential the Drilling Supervisor is in the
       logging cabin to record and observe the behaviour of tension and torque indicators.

8.    RUNNING THE BACK-OFF CHARGE

      See Section 0160/GEN : Use of Explosives in Drilling Operations.

       With the FPIT, a back-off charge can be run in tandem.  However, this is not recommended for the
        following reasons:

        a)  6 strand maximum to be run, only good for tubing and 5" drill pipe.

        b)  The CCL and FPIT mechanism can get damaged.

        c)    If the tool was dressed to anchor inside 5" pipe and this pipe was subsequently found to be free, in
            order to make measurements inside drill collars, the FPIT has to be pulled from the well to change
            the arms. A potentially hazardous operation to remove a live charge above the rotary table has
         now to be carried out.

            If a TANDEM FPIT run and back-off charge is required, then the following table of depth versus pipe
        size can be used:


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 17 از 24 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6150/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  5 (10/92)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  17 of 24

SUBJECT:  FREE POINT DETERMINATION AND BACK-OFF PROCEDURES

      PipeDiameter    Depth     PrimerChord

       5" 19.5 lbs/ft         8000'       6 strands max.
       5" HWDP           5000'       6 strands max.
       8" DC               3000'       6 strands max.

      Note:
     The mechanical arms of the FPIT cannot be deployed prior to firing the back-off charge. The build-up
      ofLHtorquecanbeobservedwiththeFPITpriortofiringthecharge.

8.1    Torque up the string fully to the right to the maximum of the drill pipe in use. Work in the RH torque.
       This may take a considerable time to do properly. Watch the ammeter and the MD weight indicator and
       observe if torque is being transmitted downhole.

8.2   Arm the back-off charge with primer chord as per Figure 6.

8.3     In floating operations to compensate for vessel heave, when running the back-off charge, an extra long
        carrier strip of primer chord can be used.  This will ensure the explosive force is focussed at the
       connection. To increase accuracy, the electric line can be partially compensated for vessel heave by
       rigging up the lower wireline sheave to the stuck pipe as illustrated in Figure 10, page 24.
       Approximately 80% of vessel heave is accounted for using this rig-up.

8.4   Run below stuck point and tie in with the CCL.

9.    APPLYING LEFT-HAND TORQUE TO CONNECTION TO BE BACKED OUT

      The 2 most important considerations for a successful back-off as mentioned previously are:

        a)  Correct neutral weight at connection to be backed off; and
        b)   Sufficient applied LH torque at that connection.

      The following technique should be used to transmit torque downhole. See Section 6.3 for top drive or
        rotary table applications.

9.1    Rotate the string 2-3 turns to the left with 5K overpull at the stuck point.  Quickly drop the brake
       catching the string with the weight on top of the stuck point.  It may be necessary to slack off weight to
        less than the neutral point of the string.  This action will initiate the LH torque downhole.  Continue
       working in LH torque more slowly now with 1 turn at a time.  (Do not exceed 80% of the make-up
        torque. This will ensure that a connection further up the string will not back off.) Work the string every
        turn with 20K overpull and 40K downweight on the stuck point.

       Hold the torque in the string with a tong line which has a gauge installed. As the string is being worked
       the gauge will indicate the drop off in surface torque  if the torque is being worked downhole. The
      amount of weight to overpull or slack-off when working the string can only be judged by noting how
        quickly the torque is going downhole. There are no fixed overpull or slack-off weights to quote in order
        to best work the torque downhole. Each hole is different and by careful observation of the Martin
      Decker and tong-line gauges the optimum weights can be found.

      The string must be worked carefully, it may take several hours to work in the torque to the stuck point.
      The time taken to do this operation will be more than repaid with a successful back-off.

      Note:
    Donotslack-offenoughweighttorecockjars.

9.2    With the correct amount of LH torque in the string, set correct neutral weight at joint to be backed out.
       Careful attention has to be given to selecting the correct weight.  Most unsuccessful back-offs are
      caused by incorrect neutral weight.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 18 از 24 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6150/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  5 (10/92)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  18 of 24

SUBJECT:  FREE POINT DETERMINATION AND BACK-OFF PROCEDURES

9.3    Position back-off charge against tool joint to be broken out.  Note that wireline is not snagged or
       trapped against derrick structure or in travelling block assembly.

9.4    Check with driller on heave and make an allowance for this. The back-off charge can be made longer
        to accommodate covering more than the length of the combined tool joints. This will allow a small error
         in depth due to the vessel's heave. (The length of primer does not affect the explosive strength. The
      number of strands is the governing factor on the force of the explosion.)

9.5     Fire back-off charges.   If the charge has gone off, surface indications include possible loss of CCL
         circuit and increase in cable tension. The driller should see a reduction in surface torque. The pipe
       should not spin back at surface as all the torque will be lost downhole if the back-off is successful.

9.6   To confirm joint has backed off at the correct place and if CCL is working, pull cable back to the next
       connection above back-off point.

9.7      Lift string carefully and check for overpull.   If joint has not fully backed out, work string up and down-
       pipe may "pop" out of threads.  If unsuccessful, gently turn in a few more LH turns and work string.

9.8   When pipe is free, pull electric cable. Work drill string and if possible circulate through pipe.

     FIGURE 6  - Primacord Shot Strength


                 Depth from Surface   0     3000'   6000'   9000'          Number of 80 gr/ft RDX
                                       (feet)     to        to        to        to     Over
       PIPE OD (inches)              3000'   6000'   9000'   12000'  12000'    primacord strands to be

        Tubing    2-3/8               1      1      1      2      2      used according to depth
                    2-7/8                                   1      1      2      2      3                    3-1/2                                               and  pipe  size.   Chart
                4 to 4-1/2           2      2      2      3      3
                                                                assumes specific gravity
            Drill       2-3/8 to 2-7/8        1      2      2-3     3-4     4-6
                                                              mud 1.2 - well full. Where        Pipe      3-1/2 to 4           2      3      3-4     4-6     5-8
                    4-1/2 to 6-9/16       2      3-4     4-6     5-9     6-12                                                                            two values are shown, the                    6-5/8               3      4-5     5-7     6-10    7-14
                                                                           higher  value  indicates            Drill       3-1/2 to 4            2-4     2-5     3-7     3-8     4-9
          Collar     4-1/8 to 5-1/2         2-4     3-6     4-8     4-10    5-12                                                            maximum explosive load
                    5-3/4 to 7            3-6     4-8     5-10    6-12    7-15
                    7-1/4 to 8-1/2         4-6     5-9     6-12    7-15    8-18     which normally  will not
                    9-3/4                         -15
                                                            damage pipes in heavy
        Casing    4-1/2 to 5-1/2        3      3      3      3      3
                6 to 7               3      3      3      4      4      mud - these high loads are
                    7-5/8               4      4      4      4      5
                    8-5/8               5      5      5      5      5       hard on CCL, head and
                    9-5/8               5      5      5      6      6
                   10-3/4              6      6      6      7      7        weights.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 19 از 24 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6150/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  5 (10/92)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  19 of 24

SUBJECT:  FREE POINT DETERMINATION AND BACK-OFF PROCEDURES

10.   DEVIATED HOLE BACK-OFF

       Example:

       Beatrice Platform A15 (Slot 13), angle 60°.


                                                       Initial    Final
                                              Pull      Pull    Meter %   RH/LH                    Meter %
              Conn.                 x 1000  x 1000   Points    Turns                      Points
        Time    No.    Size   Depth      (lb)       (lb)    (Stretch)   Put In  Amps   Torque   (Torque)

                 9    9 1/2   3992     100     150       0       3 1/4    740    20000      6
                                      150     200       1
                                      200     250       3
                                      250     300       4

                 8      8     3959     100     150      30      3 1/4    740    20000      24
                                      150     200      36
                                      300     250      34
                                      250     300      27

      Back off connection at 3959 ft.

       Weight for back-off 155,000 lbs.
       Primacord used = 17 strands.
        Left hand turns in = 3 1/4.

       Back-off was successful.

       155,000 lbs represents weight of string in mud and blocks and 10,000 lbs overpull.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 20 از 24 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6150/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  5 (10/92)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  20 of 24

SUBJECT:  FREE POINT DETERMINATION AND BACK-OFF PROCEDURES

FIGURE 7

                                    DEPTH   BEFORE STUCK

                HWDP 15 JTS                3225   WT UP                  185,000
    2.32              X/O                        3672    ROT WT                 135,000
   31.05                1 x 8" DC                    3675   WT DOWN              100,000

   30.10              JARS                       3706    BLOCKS                35,000
                                                   3736    KELLY                  15,000

                                                         DP-1                    62,887
                                                         DP-2                    22,350
  123.16                4 x 8" DC                                8" DC                    43,050
                                                                  9" DC                    63,000

                                       MUD WT                  9.3 PPG
                                          BUOYANCY FACT       0.857                                                   3859
    6.30                12 1/4" STAB                3865    BUOYANCY WT         163,933                                                     + BLOCK                198,932


   92.52                3 x 8" DC                         JARS COCK             90,000
                                                   JARS OFF               200,000

                                              MAX. DEV.              60°
    3.15              X/O                        3959
                                                   3962
   30.39                9 1/2" DC STEEL
    6.80                14 3/4" STAB                3992
                                                   3999
   29.98                9 1/2" DC STEEL
                                                   4029   14.35            SHOCK SUB                                                   4043
   30.72                9 1/2" DC STEEL
    6.35                                            4074
                                                   4080
                       9 1/2" MDC
   59.59                                            4110
                       9 1/2" MDC
                 TOTCO RING
    6.92                17 1/2" NM STAB             4140
   35.37             TELECO TOOL
    2.30                PIN-PIN X-OVER
    6.51                17 1/2" STAB
   28.35                9 1/2" MDC
    8.51           MONEL PUP
    2.30              STEEL SUB
    7.38                17 1/2" STAB
    5.47              STEEL PONY
    7.85                17 1/2" ROLLER REAMER

                                                                                                                                         2179/2


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 21 از 24 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6150/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  5 (10/92)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  21 of 24

SUBJECT:  FREE POINT DETERMINATION AND BACK-OFF PROCEDURES

FIGURE 8
                  STRETCH CHART FOR STEEL PIPE

                                                                 PIPE BODY WEIGHT
    DRILL PIPE - DRILL COLLARS - TUBING - CASING                    LBS / FT
                                                                                 1               ADDITIONAL PULL
                     LBS
                                                                                               1.5

                                                                                 2
                                300,000            SIT-D or SIT-F

                                                                                 3

                                                                                 4
                                100,000                                                                                 5         THIS IS WHY              PIPE STRAIN             SIT                                 80,000            50,000 LBS                           umm = 10 -6 ft     METER READING    6
        INCREMENTS                       ft = 10 -4 mm          'STRETCH'
        ARE USED         60,000                     800                           8
        TO TAKE          50,000                     600                                                                           100                   10        STRETCH                                       500                                 40,000                     400        READING                                                                  300
                                 30,000                            90 BECAUSE RESPONSE                                                                  200                                         NON LINEAR TOOL
                                                                          80 CALIBRATION      20
                                 20,000                     100    NORMALLY 80
                                                                   80      70
                                                                   60      60                    30                                                                   50
                                                                   40      50
                                                                                40                                                                   30      40                                 10,000
                                                                   20      30                    50
                                 8,000                                                        E.G. H.W.D.P.                                                                           20                    60                                                                                             50 LBS / FT
                                 6,000                       108      15                    80
                                 5,000                        6      10
                                                                    5      8                    100
                                 4,000                        4      6
                                                                    3
                                                                           2
                                 3,000                        2                                    D.C. 150 LBS / FT
                                                                           2                    200
                                 2,000                        1

                                                                               300

                                                                               400
                                 1,000

                                                 e        P          -5                         PIPE STRAIN,    = .1133     x 10 m / m, ft / ft, OR IN / IN
                                 L    W
                          WHERE:  P = ADDITIONAL PULL IN LBS
              W = WEIGHT PER LINEAR FOOT OF PIPE BODY, LBS / FT
                                           e                                    = ELONGATION / UNIT LENGTH
                             L
              SPACING BETWEEN CENTRALIZERS SIT-D 1560mm x 6' 3" SIT-F 1525mm = 60"


                                                                                                                                       2179 / 3


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 22 از 24 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6150/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  5 (10/92)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  22 of 24

SUBJECT:  FREE POINT DETERMINATION AND BACK-OFF PROCEDURES

11.   MAKING UP A PRIMACORD BUNDLE ON UNIJET WIRES

          •    Install Unijet wires 10 ft (3m) long in adaptor head and tape together each six inches.

          •   Lay the first primacord strand, which will later be connected to the detonator, along the length of
            the Unijet wires and hold in place at a few points with a wrap of 3/4" plastic tape.

          •    Build up the required number of strands into a neat triangular bundle around the number 1 strand
          as shown below.





                                                                         1
                                1


                                          Attach this strand
                                                 to blasting cap

         Make-Up of Primacord on Unijet Wires

      Keep strands parallel without twisting, staggering the bends at top and bottom.  Alternatively, the
       strands may be out to length and booted with P-33 771 primacord boots at both ends.

          •   Tape and string tie the bundle at top, bottom and a few intermediate points.

          •   Cut primacord at lower end and install a blind boot.

          •   Tape the whole bundle once, half lapping the friction tape.

          •   Retape over ends, avoiding excessive use of tape which may plug the bit or hinder subsequent
           descent. String tie ends top and bottom.

            If the shot has been prepared and subsequently not run, the primer chord is scrapped and is never run
        twice.

12.   MAKING UP PRIMACORD BUNDLE ON A SHOT BAR

          •    Install a 7 ft (typically) long shot bar to the wireline adaptor head.

          •   Lay the first primacord strand, which will later be connected to the detonator, along the length of
            the shot bar. Hold it in place at a few points by a few wraps of plastic tape.

          •   Attach the required number of strands around the bar, each additional strand next to the previous
            strand.  If the circumferential area is covered, a new layer should be started.

          •   Keep strands parallel without twisting. Bend round or cut the strands to the correct length.

          •   Tape and string tie the bundle at top, bottom and a few intermediate points.

          •   Attach the detonator cap to the first strand and cover with rubber boot. Tape and tie both ends.

          •   Tape the whole bundle once, half lapping the friction tape. String tie at both ends.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 23 از 24 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6150/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  5 (10/92)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  23 of 24

SUBJECT:  FREE POINT DETERMINATION AND BACK-OFF PROCEDURES

FIGURE 9

                  1 3/8 " O.D. UNI-SYSTEM BACK-OFF ASSY. DATA SHEET


            111/16" ASSY.               1 3/8 " ASSY.





                    CCL-L             CCL-N

                              P. 186792
                         1 11/ 16" TO 1 3/8 "            P. 30487
                  ADAPTOR
                                                         P. 186470 - 1 3/8 "ADAPTOR
                                         (SUPPLIED WITH PIN)

                          B. 18272 - B. 15810 -                                                         P. 190048 - ADAPTOR CLAMP                SCREW &
                WASHER
                                                           APPROX
                    4"                  B-73760
                                     PRESSURE TIGHT CAP
                                                               RECOMMENDED                                                           BUNDLE             PRIMACORD BUNDLE -
                                      STRING TIE EACH 6"                 10"      5"
                    TO
                    4"
                                                   P-190048
                                    ADAPTOR CLAMP
                       B. 18272 -
                       B. 15810 -

                                              1 3/8 " (REF)
               P. 186786 BOTTOM NOSE
           (SUPPLIED WITH PIN)


                         OPTIONAL WHEN
                         CENTERING NEEDED




                                                                                                                                                      2179 / 69


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 24 از 24 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6150/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  5 (10/92)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  24 of 24

SUBJECT:  FREE POINT DETERMINATION AND BACK-OFF PROCEDURES

   FIGURE 10                                  Crown          TOP-DRIVE(or KELLY)         Crown
                                  Sheave                                            Sheave                                    CONNECTED TO
                                    STUCK PIPE FOR   STUCK PIPE SUPPORTED                                    BACK-OFF OPERATION :     BY ELEVATORS FOR                                    PARTIALLY COMPENSATED        FREE POINT
      MEASUREMENTS

                                                                              Travelling
                                                                Assy

             TOP
              DRIVE                                                                      Hook               UNIT


                    "Bicycle"
                 frame to
                 route cable                                                                                   Swivel                     into APE


                                                      For Wireline Entry,
                                                remove Gooseneck
                                                              Bullplug, or complete
                                               Gooseneck Assembly



                          Long Links
                                                          Top Drive
                                                                                   Quill Shaft

                                        Bell Line
                                 Wiper
                                                  - can hold                      Upper IBOP
                              2000 psi
      IBOP                                                            Lower IBOP

                                                                Saver Sub
    Side Entry
      Sub


                                                                                       Sheave
      IBOP                                                                                                       fixed to
                                                                                                 Stuck Pipe
                                                                  Stuck Pipe
                                Sheave
     Elevators                                          fixed to                                                      Dog Collar
                                                   Drill Floor                                                       Logging                                                           Clamp    Stuck Pipe                                       Logging                                                                                                                  Unit
                                                              Unit
                                                 Drill Floor                                          Drill Floor


