

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 20 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6200/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  7 (11/94)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  1 of 20

SUBJECT:  FISHING - PROCEDURES AND TOOLS

1.    FISHING (GENERAL)

       Fishing is an expensive and non productive operation.  All progress stops.

       General Causes:       1.  Equipment Failure.

                                  2.  Drill string or casing sticking.

        1.  Equipment Failure

            a)   Exceeding equipment strength limits.

            b)   Equipment wear.

             c)   Cracks, leading to equipment failures and drill string twist offs.

            d)   Lack of good maintenance.

        2.  Stuck Pipe

            a)  Caused by squeezing formations due to insufficient mud weight.

            b)   Pressure differential sticking due to too high a mud weight causing too much overbalance or
                pressure differential.

             c)   Poor quality mud, because too high a solid content, high gels, too thick a filter cake or other
                cause.

      Equipment failure can be virtually eliminated by a well established maintenance programme.  Stuck
       pipe is a matter of appreciating the danger of incorrect mud weights and inferior quality mud.

       Stuck pipe problems, caused by differential sticking have been solved very successfully with solvents
      such as Pipe Lax, Mud Ban and other similar brands or by lowering the mud weight.

        In case of no success establish as soon as possible the stuck point.

       Prevention is far cheaper than cure and whatever tool goes down the hole; contractor or rental tools,
       ensure these have a certificate of their last inspection.

       Negligence and payment disputes are solved much more readily  if regular inspection and reports are
        available.

        In any fishing operation considerable attention must be paid to all equipment run in the hole.

        1.  Ensure ALL fishing tools used are recorded on a drawing prior to running.

        2.  Ensure all Internal Diameters used can pass back off tools.

        3.  Where possible fax a drawing of the fish to the Drilling Office.

        4.  Accurate depth records are vitally important.

         Where a twist off has occurred tag the top of fish prior to POH and strap the pipe on the way out.

        5.  The condition of all fishing tools, i.e. grapples, overshot bowls, jars, mills etc., must be physically
           inspected by the BP Drilling Supervisor prior to assembly and making up.

        6.  Ensure solvents are on site, e.g. Pipe Lax or Mud Ban to spot around the fish ASAP.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 2 از 20 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6200/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  7 (11/94)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  2 of 20

SUBJECT:  FISHING - PROCEDURES AND TOOLS

2.    GENERAL FISHING PRACTICES

       (Consult 6050/GEN - Jar Placement and Jarring Practices.)

2.1    Fishing Assembly

       Fishing tool - bumper sub - jar - 1 x DC - stabiliser - accelerator - HWDP - DP.

      Note:
      ForthenumberofDC’srequired,see2.2.

      Assembly should be chosen according to tool availability and problems encountered for each job at
       hand.

2.2    The fishing string DC weight should equal or exceed the weight of the fish.  It is recognised that in some
       cases this amount of drill collars may exceed the accelerator’s manufacturers recommendations.

      Note:
      Review the amount of DC’s run with an accelerator to achieve the desired jarring effect, taking into
      account the deviation of the hole and the possibility of differential sticking. The principle is that the
       heavier the fishing assembly then the greater the duration of impact. Minimum drill collar weight results
      inadestructivelyhighimpactvelocity,strikingthejaranvilforaminimaltimeandinducinganineffective
     movementofthefish. TheJARPROPROGRAMMEcanbeconsultedonthisissue.

2.3   An accelerator is required in deviated holes and when fishing at shallow depths, where there is
         insufficient pipe stretch to achieve the necessary impact on the fish.

      Note:
     Ensuretheacceleratorstrokelengthexceedsthatofthejar.

2.4   A bumper sub is required in all fishing assemblies.

2.5     Stabilisers may be incorporated into an assembly to provide stabilisation of the fishing tool.  Inside
       casing a soft blade or non-rotating stabiliser is required.

2.6    Only when using taper taps, die collars or washover strings, should a safety joint and circulation sub be
        installed in the assembly (to facilitate a circulation and release capability should problems occur).

2.7   A circulation sub is required where tool ID’s are small and/or where there is a possibility of toolstring
      becoming plugged.  Note that excessive jarring may cause the sleeve to shear out and prevent
        circulation through the fish. Always ensure the shear pins in the sleeve are new.

2.8    Ensure that all fishing equipment is properly maintained and that there is an updated inventory at all
        times.

2.9    During each fishing operation ensure that there is a good understanding of the fishing tools (their
       strengths and applied stresses) by ALL drilling personnel. (Communication is vital.)

2.10   Ensure dimensions of all downhole equipment are recorded and a drawing made of each tool prior to
       running in the hole.

2.11   Ensure all depths and pipe tallies are correct.

2.12   Ensure contractor and rental tools have updated and valid inspection reports available.

      Ensure all fishing tool ID’s can accommodate any internal fishing or back-off tool which may
       subsequently be run.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 3 از 20 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6200/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  7 (11/94)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  3 of 20

SUBJECT:  FISHING - PROCEDURES AND TOOLS

2.13   The Drilling Superintendent must be informed of any alteration or modification to any standard fishing
         tool.

2.14     If a twist off occurs, the hole should be circulated and the mud conditioned prior to pulling out of the
        hole. This is not so necessary if there are few cuttings in the hole (e.g. very slow drilling rates).

          •  Avoid washing out the hole above the fish.

          •  Improve mud properties where possible to assist fishing operations.

          •  Tag fish prior to pulling out of hole. Strap pipe during pulling out of the hole.

          •    If differentially stuck, lower mud weight or implement “U” tube method (if there are no well control
           ramifications) only  if approved by Drilling Superintendent.  Refer to Sections 6000/GEN and
         6010/GEN.

          •  While pulling out after a twist off, check every connection for washouts.

2.15   With a twisted off string at surface, check the counterpart of the fish CAREFULLY to determine as
       accurately as possible, size, shape and condition of fish. See item 4.2.2.

2.16  When bit cones or similar junk items have been lost on bottom and it is considered better to fish than to
        sidetrack around fish, a jet junk retriever is the first option unless an “Apple” tool is available (an “Apple”
        tool with redress kits should be organised).

2.17   Fax a drawing of the fish to the Drilling Superintendent.

2.18   Prior to connecting to a fish, ensure that the following are known:

          •  String weight up, down and rotating with and without circulation (as applicable for each tool run).

          •  Free rotating torque of the fishing string.

          •  Pipe stretch and strokes of fishing tools.

          •  Jarring calculations, safe working loads, strengths of fishing tools, etc.

          •  Establish circulating rates and pressures.

          •  Circulate and condition mud prior to fishing, if required.

2.19   Tools are to be checked by Drilling Supervisor prior to running into the hole.

2.20   Ensure that during the fishing operation, the tool joints of the fishing string are not opposite the BOP’s.

2.21   Circulate slowly when searching for fish. An increase in pressure, while lowering, and/or rotating, will
       confirm tool location on top of fish (pack-off rubbers normally good for up to 1000 psi).

       At this point shut pumps down if required.

            If fish does not come free and back-off is required, refer to Section 6150/GEN.

2.22  When a fish is free, circulate bottoms up before flow checking and pulling out. Check degasser
        operation.

2.23  When fishing packer/completion assemblies initially circulate over chokes.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 4 از 20 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6200/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  7 (11/94)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  4 of 20

SUBJECT:  FISHING - PROCEDURES AND TOOLS

2.24   While Pulling Out a Fish:

          •  Do not pull more than 85% of the minimum yield strength of the pipe.

          •  Circulate while working the fish through tight spots.

          •  Pick up and set string in slips carefully avoiding any shock loading to toolstring.

          •  Do not rotate a fish while pulling out of the hole.

2.25     If fishing tools cannot be released, the installation of a surface jar with a 48” stroke will provide the
       necessary bump down to release the fishing tool.  Ensure that the surface jar is initially set on its
      minimum tonnage adjustment to prevent damage to the surface equipment.

      Note:
       Priortojarring,ensurethatallsurfaceequipmentisinastateofreadiness.

3.    GENERAL JARRING PRACTICES

3.1    Preparation for Jarring Operations

       (Consult 6050/GEN for additional information.)

        1)  Check derrick and equipment for loose bolts, clamps, sheaves, etc. before and during extended
           periods of jarring.

        2)   Prior to jarring mark string at the rotary table.

        3)  Check drill line sensator thoroughly. Ensure weight readings are correct and that the anchor line
          clamp remains secure.

        4)  Have all unnecessary personnel off the drill floor during jarring operations.

        5)    If applicable, installation of the kelly is required before jarring. With top drive regularly check top
            drive components. Bleed down top drive counterbalance system, if applicable.

        6)    If prolonged jarring is expected (e.g. cutting and pulling casings), consider laying out swivel if kelly
               is in use.

        7)    If elevators are used for jarring, ensure latches are additionally secured.

        8)  Ensure rig floor supervisors are kept informed of tool use, strengths, capabilities, problems
           envisaged, etc.

3.2    Jarring Operations

        1)  Always allow the jars to trip at their safe working load before pulling to the maximum allowable limit.
         Know safe working loads for all tools. Never exceed this until jar has tripped.  Only then apply
            extra overpull.

        2)  When using a surface jar, commence at lightest tonnage setting available, then increase as
            required.

          Caution: Do not set trip tonnage of surface jar greater than the weight of free pipe to surface
          above the stuck point. This prevents the fish being pulled tighter into the stuck point.

        3)   Slip the blockline regularly. Rule of thumb 2 - 4 hours while jarring.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 5 از 20 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6200/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  7 (11/94)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  5 of 20

SUBJECT:  FISHING - PROCEDURES AND TOOLS

        4)   After fish is recovered, slip and cut blockline at the casing shoe during first trip into the hole.

        5)  Depending on the jar in use, maximise the jarring efficiency.

         Note:
         Withthepumpon: Efficiencyisincreasedwhenjarringup.
                               Efficiencyisdecreasedwhenjarringdown.

        6)  Avoid running jar in the neutral point.  This will cause rapid and severe damage to hydraulic
          mechanisms.

        7)  Normally position jars at least 10m from any stabiliser to allow jar to flex.

        8)  Ensure that type of jar selected will do the job.  Follow manufacturer’s recommended operating
           procedures.

        9)  Ensure operating instructions are available on the rig.

           It is essential that all Drillers are fully aware of jar operating techniques and are fully conversant
       with fishing situation. This relies on good communication.

4.    FISHING EQUIPMENT

4.1    Force Multiplying Tools

       General

      The operation of force multiplying tools, i.e. jars, accelerators and bumper subs, primarily exploit the
        force contained in the stretch of the toolstring.

      Bumper subs provide a method of delivering upward and downward blows.  Jars provide a force for
      upward and/or downward blows dependent on type of jar in use.  Accelerators or jar intensifiers
       increase the force of these blows by releasing stored energy as the jar trips. The upward movement of
       the drill collars in the fishing string is accelerated and as the jar reaches its full stroke the total impact is
        delivered directly to the fish.

4.1.1  Conventional Bumper Subs

       General

     A hexagonal, splined or other shaped mandrel and body transmits torque and allows several inches of
      upward or downward stroke to the fishing string.  It also assists in defining the neutral point and allows
         for string movement for the “working in” of torque.

       This allowance for movement by a stretched string is adequate to activate the releasing mechanism in
       overshots and spears.  Also generally adequate for freeing a stuck fish or tool in a moderately sticky
        formation.

      The bumper sub should be installed immediately above the fishing tool.

       Operation

        a)  To “Bump Down”

           Pick up string enough to open tool completely and take an allowable strain on the string (hole drag
            plus 20,000 lbs initially). Note free movement while bumper sub is opening.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 6 از 20 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6200/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  7 (11/94)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  6 of 20

SUBJECT:  FISHING - PROCEDURES AND TOOLS

         By dropping the string to within 6” of the closed position of the tool and stopping the string abruptly
            with the brake, the lower end of the string will be caused to bump downward, closing the bumper
           sub. Due to the elasticity of the string, a series of downward blows will be delivered to the tool
          below the subs.

        b)  To Bump a Solid Downward Blow

           Pick up string as above, i.e. length of tool stroke.

          Drop the string to its neutral weight without braking.

         The bumper sub will quickly close.

         The lower end of the mandrel body strikes the shoulder on the lower end of the mandrel,
             transmitting a single solid blow to the tool below.

        c)  To Bump a Solid Blow at Surface in Order to Disengage a Fishing Tool

          Leave at least 1 DC above bumper sub.

           Pick up stroke of bumper sub and bump down on fish.

        A solid blow will occur to the fishing tool effecting release of tool from the fish.

4.1.2   Accelerators

       General

     An accelerator concentrates the jarring action within the drill collars above the jar, preventing the
      “hammer” forces dissipating up the string.  This results in a higher hammer velocity which increases
       impact and impulse.

            It is a powerful component within the fishing BHA and should always be run.

      An accelerator is a totally free end consisting of a sliding mandrel within a sleeve. When the drill string
         is run in the hole, the accelerator is stroked out. When overpull is applied and the jar trips, the
        accelerator will stroke up and the jar will impact before the accelerator does. For this reason, the stroke
        of an accelerator MUST be greater than the stroke of the jar.

      Care must be taken when using a combination of a jar and an accelerator. Very high impact forces are
       generated and calculation of possible loading must be done prior to deciding how many drill collars to
       run between the two components.

      The JARPRO computer programme can be used to determine the loadings on a fishing BHA when
       using an accelerator.

4.1.3  A fishing assembly of Jar, 4 x DCs, Accelerator, 4 x DCs would be sufficient to jar up successfully and
      have enough weight available to jar down to free spears, overshots, etc.

4.2    Overshots

4.2.1  General Guidelines and Procedures

        1)  A pack-off is required with an overshot in order to circulate through the fish before pulling out.
        When fishing TCP guns, do not use a pack-off as it would prevent circulation.

        2)  Do not limit the penetration of the fish into the overshot to facilitate tool release from the fish. The
           primary objective is recovery of the fish and the grapple’s taper will allow release with a forceful
          knock downwards.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 7 از 20 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6200/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  7 (11/94)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  7 of 20

SUBJECT:  FISHING - PROCEDURES AND TOOLS

        3)  Use an extension sub when appropriate to enable the desired catch area to be reached by the
           grapple and packer. Ensure that, on full engagement with the fish, both the grapple and the packer
           element will NOT be positioned alongside any reduced diameter such as a slip or elevator recess.

        4)  Try and utilise full strength overshots at all times.  (This is the only tool designed to withstand
              jarring and rotation.)

         Note:
      Aslimholeovershotisdesignedforpick-uponly.

        5)  A spiral grapple can withstand greater overpulls and has a greater contact area between bowl and
               fish. However, if the top of fish requires dressing, a basket grapple and mill control are required.

        6)    If utilised for a back-off, to prevent backing off top sub or bowl connections, a standard overshot
            with left handed bowl, guide and top sub connections is preferred.

        7)    If utilised for backing off 3 1/2” or smaller tubulars, a standard overshot with right hand threaded
          bowl tapers and appropriate grapples is preferred.  Left hand rotation would normally release tool
           from fish. However, if slight tension is applied, enough torque can be applied to back off smaller
            tubulars before tool releases itself.

         Note:
        The make-up torque of tubulars is significantly less than the make-up torque of overshot
          connections.

        8)   Spiral grapples will effectively pack-off a worn fish as much as 3/32” undersize. Overrange of each
           grapple is approximately 1/32”.

        9)  Basket grapple tolerances are the same as for spiral grapples.

       10)  If size of fish is uncertain, consideration should be given to a multibowl and grapples.

4.2.2   Operational Procedures

       Surface Checks

      Check overshot is correctly dressed, that bowl tapers and wickers on the grapple are unworn with all
        parts in good condition.   It is worth testing the grapple on the recovered section of the fish.   If the
       grapple can fit onto the matching part of the fish on surface, it is in fact too big and the next size down
       should be used.  Ensure top sub is bored out (to allow passage of free point indicator and back-off
        tools) and internally painted.

      Ensure accurate measurements and drawings have been made and recorded.  Select correct guide
      shoe and mill control to suit situation and hole conditions present.

      Check that the guide shoe will not pass the fish in the hole. An oversized guide shoe may be required.

      Once the overshot is made up, ensure that the grapple is free to move in the overshot bowl.

      Engaging the Fish

        Prior to engaging the fish, check weights up and down and rotating. Circulate above fish to clean top of
         fish. Record pump rates and pressures. Tag top of fish to ascertain its exact depth. Circulate bottoms
      up if you have been out of the hole for an extended period.

      Note:
        If gas has accumulated in the borehole (especially in production wells) and it is not possible to circulate
     whenlatchedontothefish,thegasmaybecomeaproblemwhenpullingout.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 8 از 20 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6200/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  7 (11/94)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  8 of 20

SUBJECT:  FISHING - PROCEDURES AND TOOLS

       Pick up string and commence rotating slowly and pumping at a low rate. Lower string slowly until weight
         is taken and/or a pressure increase is observed. Stop the pump, ensuring that no pressure is trapped.
       Continue rotating and lower string until sufficient weight has been taken.

       Stop rotating and release any torque from the toolstring.

        Pulling on the Fish

     A pull on the fishing assembly causes the grapple to be moved downwards in relation to the bowl of the
       overshot resulting in a firm grip on the fish being taken.  If the fish does not come free, then attempt to
        circulate down through the fish.  If the fish comes free, continue circulating at least bottoms up.

        Prior to Pulling Out of Hole

            If it is uncertain how well the fish is engaged, consideration should be given to carrying out the following
       procedure as it is better to drop the fish on bottom than POH.

       With overshot engaged and any torque released from the string, ensure a firm grip on the fish is taken
      by lowering part of the string weight onto the overshot (+/- 40% of fish string weight). Pick up the fish 2
        to 3m and drop the string 1m, catching the string on the brake.

        Pulling Out of Hole

       Avoid bumping string when setting the slips. Circulate through tight spots.

     Do not rotate the fishing string.

       Releasing the Overshot from the Fish

            If the fish does not come free, the tool can be released by bumping down on the fish and rotating
       simultaneously to the right. Picking up on the toolstring will allow the overshot to feed itself off from the
         fish.

       Precautions When Using Tools

       Unless an upward strain is maintained, never rotate the fishing string to the left while the overshot is
      engaged with the fish.

      Always bump down the toolstring before starting releasing operations. Increase bump down weight as
       required if tool cannot be released.

      Always shut off pumps before lowering overshot over the fish (to prevent damaging seal/packer).

     When fish has been freed, monitor trip tank levels at all times and circulate at least bottoms up.

5.    SPEARS

5.1    General

        1)  Spears should be dressed with a pack-off to circulate through and around the fish.

        2)  A stop ring or stop sub should be utilised to prevent too deep an entry into the fish, to provide the
               ability to reset jars, and to enable easier tool release.

        3)  Spears should be run in the latch position.

        4)    If release of spear from the fish is required, bump down before commencing releasing operations.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 9 از 20 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6200/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  7 (11/94)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  9 of 20

SUBJECT:  FISHING - PROCEDURES AND TOOLS

        5)   In order to release the fish, right hand rotation while picking up the string will feed the left hand
           wickers on the spear slips or grapple off the fish.

        6)  On smaller spears, install a circulation sub in the fishing assembly to prevent the small ID from
          becoming plugged.

        7)    If the spear requires rotation to release the slips (e.g. J slot, etc.), in deep or crooked holes more
           than one full turn to set or release the spear will be required. Always maintain a moderate upward
             strain on fishing tool when rotating for release or setting operations.

        8)   In thin walled tubing or casing, release spear frequently to ensure wall deformation will not prevent
             tool release.

        9)  When engaging spear, space out toolstring so that a tool joint is just above the rotary table.

5.2    Operational Procedures

       Surface Checks

      Examine and ensure that spear grapple wickers are sharp and the size is correct for the fish to be
       engaged. Ensure that the spear is correctly assembled and that all parts are in good working order.
      Ensure all measurements of tools are taken and recorded.

        Prior to RIH, with the spear made up on the string, check release and operation of grapple on main
       spear body. Reset spear into latch position for running into the hole.  In deep wells the grapple should
      be secured in the catch position.  Drill a small hole in the grapple and spear mandrel, then pin in place
        with a mild steel pin.

      Above the Fish

      Check string weights up, down and rotating, monitor free rotating torque and establish circulating rates
      and pressures.

      To Engage and Pull the Fish

      Tag fish by noting weight decrease or pressure increase. Shut down pump at this point and bleed off
      any trapped pressure.

      Lower string until spear has entered fish to the desired depth (measure amount of entry). Prevent stop
        ring from bottoming out.

       Rotate spear,  if applicable, to rotate mandrel of tool through the grapple, setting the grapple in its
       engaging position.

       Fish can now be pulled. Pulling will wedge the grapple into a positive engagement on the fish.

     When engaged attempt to circulate.  If circulation is not possible, maintain up to 1000 psi to enhance jar
       performance.  If pressure can be maintained, jars can be reset without bottoming out on stop ring due
        to pack-off friction.

      To Release from the Fish

     Bump down with the weight of the fishing string. This breaks engagement of spear grapple on the fish.
       Rotate a few turns to the right and pick up the string until spear is clear of fish.

       Right hand rotation moves the mandrel up through the grapple forcing the grapple down against the
        releasing ring and putting the spear in the release position.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 10 از 20 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6200/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  7 (11/94)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  10 of 20

SUBJECT:  FISHING - PROCEDURES AND TOOLS

            If the spear does not release, bump down, then simultaneously rotate to the right.  Pick up the string
         until spear is clear of fish.

      Note:
      With prolonged jarring operations using a spear, it is essential that at least once every hour the spear is
      released from the fish then re-engaged. This prevents the possibility of the spear grapple becoming
      “bedded” into the fish. Consider running a safety joint in the fishing assembly, especially when fishing
       largediametercasingsasthespeargrapplecanveryquicklybecomeirretrievablylockedtothefish.

6.   WASHOVER STRINGS

6.1    General

      Washover strings are required where:

        1)  The formation has bridged off and stuck the string.

        2)  Where the string has become cemented.

        3)  Washing/milling over a stuck completion or drill string BHA.

        4)  Dressing the top of a fish to latch onto with a fishing assembly.

        5)  Where sidetracking is impossible.

       Generally a maximum washover string length of 50m should not be exceeded.  This will prevent the
      wash string from becoming mechanically stuck or from twisting off (especially in deviated or crooked
        holes).

6.2   Washover Shoe Selection

        Inside Casing: Hard facing only on the inside of the shoe.

        In Open Hole: Hard facing can be both inside and outside.

       Clearance is small; use a thin walled shoe. Free movement and torque observation is critical in such
        operations.

     Due to temperatures required for proper application of cutting materials,  it is best to maintain 3/8”
      minimum wall thickness in the dressed or head area of the shoe.  This ensures adequate strength to
       prevent tearing and allows the wall thickness to hold enough cutting material to accomplish washover
      and milling operations.

      To allow adequate circulation and to reduce torque, adequate clearance is desirable on the ID and OD
        of the shoe.  It is recommended that the ID of the cutting head of the shoe be dressed to at least 1/16”
        less than the wash pipe ID and the OD to at least 1/16” larger than the wash pipe OD. This permits the
      use of inner and outer gauge cutters on the head of the shoe which will trim the fish so it passes on to
       the wash pipe without interference. The outer gauge cutters provide a circulation path in the annulus
         for cuttings removal. Where conditions allow, these clearances should be enlarged, provided that the
        3/8” minimum thickness of the shoe can be maintained.

6.3   Washover Operations

        1)  Washover shoe selection is critical for a successful operation.

        2)  The number of washover joints to be made up will be dependent on:

            a)   Length of pack-off to stuck point.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 11 از 20 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6200/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  7 (11/94)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  11 of 20

SUBJECT:  FISHING - PROCEDURES AND TOOLS

            b)   Hole conditions and tolerances.

             c)   Generally no more than 30m should be initially run.

        3)  A safety joint, drive sub, bumper sub, jar and drill collars should be installed above the washover
              string. Install a junk basket into the assembly if required.

        4)  The assembly is run into just above the fish. At this position:

            a)   Establish string weights, string stretch and rotating weight.

            b)   Carefully note free rotating torque at various RPM’s between 20 and 100.

             c)   Establish various circulation rates and pressures.

        5)  a)   Start rotating slowly with low RPM (20 - 50).

            b)   Slowly lower the string until light weight is taken (6,000 lbs maximum).

             Note:
                 Utilising low weight and RPM initially will reduce the possibility of splitting or flaring the
             washovershoe.

             c)   Monitor torque continuously as progress is made.

            d)  Use sufficient pump rate to remove cuttings. Monitor mud properties and confirm at bottoms
              up that cuttings are being returned.

            e)  Once progress is being made, establish weight, torque and RPM to achieve the optimum
             ROP.

          RPM    20 - 100 max.
               Weight  2,000 - 8,000 lbs max.

             Note:
             a) Rotationandcirculationshouldbestoppedperiodically.
            b) Torquebuild-upandstringresistanceshouldbemonitoredcontinuously.

                  f)      It may be necessary to pump viscous pills to assist in removing cuttings from the annulus.

            g)   Regularly pick up the wash shoe. This will maximise wear and effectiveness of shoe.

            h)  Once operation is complete, the hole should be circulated clean, the wash string removed and
                 the fishing assembly made up.

                   i)   An overshot assembly will generally be run.

                   j)   Attempts will be made to circulate through and retrieve the fish.

             k)     If fishing is not successful, then a free point indicator tool and back-off will be required.

                   l)   Once the back-off is achieved, the washover operation is repeated. This is repeated until all
                  of the fish is retrieved.

7.    JUNK SUBS AND JUNK BASKETS

      Junk subs and junk baskets are used for removing objects generally too heavy to be removed from the
       hole by normal circulation. They are run as close to the bottom of a BHA as possible.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 12 از 20 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6200/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  7 (11/94)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  12 of 20

SUBJECT:  FISHING - PROCEDURES AND TOOLS

7.1   Junk Subs

        1)  Up to three junk subs may be run in tandem for excessive junk removal.

        2)   In completion fluids the assistance of viscous pills will generally be required to lift junk off bottom.

        3)  General procedure would be to go to bottom at maximum pump rate and work junk sub on/off
          bottom a few times.   If a bit/mill is used, spudding and rotating to break up junk would not be
         uncommon. The pump would be shut down for a few minutes periodically just off bottom. The
           procedure is repeated until all of the junk is recovered.

7.2    Operation

      The mud stream agitates the junk and lifts it. The annular capacity between the wall of the tool and the
       hole is smaller towards the bottom of the sub. Above the basket the annular capacity is greater
        resulting in a lower flowrate. Junk drops out of the mud at this point into the junk basket cup. The junk
         is retrieved when the basket is pulled.

7.3    Operational Procedures

        a)  Rotate to bottom at maximum pump rate.

        b)  Gently tag bottom, pick up 6” and fish for junk. This will lift and remove any small, light pieces of
            junk which would otherwise be further jammed/pushed into the hole  if weight on bit was applied.
             After fishing for junk, sit on bottom and rotate noting torque.

        c)  Stop the pump and work the string slowly +/- 10m.

        d)  Repeat a) to c) until on bottom torque is smooth.

7.4    Jet Junk Retrievers

      The jet junk retriever should always be stored completely undressed, i.e. with the finger cage, bearing
       races and shear pin assemblies removed.  Store these in oil or grease. Check free rotation of cage
        within bearing races once the tool is dressed and made up to the string.

        After the tool is made up to toolstring, ensure fingers are free.

     Do not install nozzle protectors as they could jam in place.

      Run retriever in the hole at a controlled rate to within a few metres of bottom.

        In open hole and  if formations are loose or unconsolidated, break circulation regularly to flush the
       basket.

     On bottom establish weights, circulation rates/pressures and free rotating torque. Rotate slowly and tag
         fish. Clean top of fish and circulate as required.

      Note:
     Takecarefishdoesnotdamageinternalfingerswhilerotatingtobottom.

     When the retriever and top of the fish is clear, drop the ball and slowly pump the ball to seat. Allow up
        to 2 min./300m for the ball to seat.

     When the ball seats and the piston shear pins shear, pressure may increase or decrease dependent on
        tool size. (The flow area of the flushing nozzle may be more or less than that of the jet nozzles.)

     When pins shear, run the pumps at normal operating rates.  Rotate down to the fish, and work the
        string to retrieve junk into the tool.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 13 از 20 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6200/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  7 (11/94)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  13 of 20

SUBJECT:  FISHING - PROCEDURES AND TOOLS

7.5    “Core Type” Reverse Circulating Junk Retrievers

      Note:
      Coringshouldonlybeconsideredwhereverysoftformationenablescoringwithminimalrotation.

        1)  Ensure correct size of ball is available before the tool is run.

        2)  Check all ID’s of the string to ensure that the ball will pass.

        3)  Ensure catcher fingers can rotate and work freely after the tool has been fully made up.

        4)  Run the tool to above the fish.

        5)  Slowly pump the ball to seat while working the string just above the fish.

        6)  Once the ball is seated increase circulation rate and rotate the string slowly while lowering the
           basket to the bottom of the hole.

        7)   In soft formations continue rotating until a core of at least 0.25m has been cut.

          Core with 2000 - 5000 lbs, and 20 - 100 RPM. Feed drum constantly when coring.

        8)  Increasing torque may indicate that the tool is passing over or encountering junk on the bottom of
            the hole.

7.6    Hydraulic Junk Retrievers (“Apple” Tool)

        Prior to running this tool, the profile of the previous bit should be considered. A bit with a concave head
          will leave a raised profile in the centre of the hole. This raised section tends to make the soft fingers of
       the “Apple” tool deform. When the tool is lifted off bottom, this deformation can cause any captured
       junk to fall out.

      Check at surface that the tool is correctly assembled.

        a)  Back-off tool and remove outer barrel and shoe.
        b)  Remove piston and check “O” rings on inner barrel.
        c)   Install finger sleeve on piston (grub screws).
        d)   Re-install piston back to upset on inner barrel.
        e)  Make up outer barrel and mill shoe using chain tongs.
           f)  Check rupture disc is in place and drop ball is retained.
        g)  Check ball will pass all ID’s of the fishing string.

      Run in hole with the tool.

         Install kelly or top drive prior to tagging fish.

      Engage pump and establish operating parameters.
     Wash down to top of fish.

      Max. 350 GPM for 16 1/2”, 11 3/4” and 8 1/2” tools.
      Max. 200 GPM for 5 3/4” tool.

      Tag fish or bottom with minimal weight.
        Circulate and condition mud if required.

       Apply light weight and low RPM to work junk inside the tool.

      2000 - 5000 lbs, 20 - 100 RPM.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 14 از 20 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6200/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  7 (11/94)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  14 of 20

SUBJECT:  FISHING - PROCEDURES AND TOOLS

       (Cores may be cut if required. Fingers will cut soft to medium formations.)

      Release the ball, and pump slowly to seat.
         (+/- 1 1/2 - 2 minutes per 300m.)

            If hole conditions permit, stop rotating prior to ball seating.

     A pressure increase will be observed as the ball seats. The piston will close with a stall pressure of less
       than 2500 psi.

     When the piston has closed the tool, the rupture disc in the top sub will shear at 2500 psi and
        circulation can be continued. Raise the tool off bottom before recommencing rotation.

      Keep circulation to a minimum once the tool is closed.

      Note:
        If considerable time is lost breaking off the kelly to drop the ball, it may be necessary to work back over
      thejunkwiththepumpofftoavoidoperatingthetoolprematurely.

8.    TAPER TAPS AND DIE COLLARS

       Taper taps and die collars should only be run as a last resort. The disadvantages associated with them
       outweigh the advantages.

8.1    Operational Procedures

       Both tools are run in the hole to the top of the fish. Circulation is commenced and the string rotated. As
         light a weight as possible is then applied and the tapered threads of the tool cut and embed the tool
        on/in the fish.

8.2    Advantages of Taper Taps and Die Collars

       Simple and easy to run. Inexpensive and no maintenance required.

        After running tools with no success, the fish OD or ID may have been dressed or distorted sufficiently to
      use another type of fishing tool.

8.3    Disadvantages of Taper Taps and Die Collars

       Tools cannot be released once engaged. A safety joint, circulation sub and jarring assembly should be
       run in conjunction with these tools.

       Fish engagement may be difficult to achieve.

       Tools have a limited catch range.

       Connections in most cases only withstand limited overpulls or jarring capabilities.

      Gauging of torque is very difficult to monitor during operations.

      The ability to apply limited torque can result in an insecure hold.

            If too much torque is applied, the tool can become damaged or the fish can become distorted, making
        further engagement impossible.

       With taper taps, string shots and cutting tools cannot be run due to the restricted ID’s of the tools.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 15 از 20 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6200/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  7 (11/94)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  15 of 20

SUBJECT:  FISHING - PROCEDURES AND TOOLS

9.    MISCELLANEOUS FISHING TOOLS

9.1    Wireline Spear

     A wireline spear to run to fish for parted wireline downhole.

      The tool should be run in to a maximum depth of 150m or until resistance is encountered. The spear is
       then picked up every 10m until resistance is encountered.

      The tool is rotated one or two turns ONLY. When engaged an overpull is taken until the line and
       equipment come free or the line breaks at its weak point.

      Note:
        Installanopencirculatingsubabovetheropespear.
    A stop ring is required to prevent the spear from passing too far past the wire and possibly getting
       furtherstuck.

9.2    Impression Blocks

      Run the tool to above the top of the fish.  Circulate above the fish to clear the fish and increase the
       accuracy of impression.

      Lower the LIB (Lead Impression Block) onto the fish and apply weight as required.  Pull the tool out of
       the hole and examine impression.

      Note:
        Ifrequired,placeanopencirculatingsubabovetheLIB.

9.3    Fishing Magnets

       There are two basic types of fishing magnet:

        a)  Permanent magnets.
        b)  Electro-magnets.

      Type a) is supplied by fishing companies and type b) by wireline companies.

        a)  Permanent Magnets

         The properties of two common magnets are stated below:

         Bowen Fishing Magnet
             Material: Alnico
            Suitable for temperatures up to 550°C

           This type of magnet does not deteriorate in storage.  However, in service whilst making and
           breaking contact between magnet and ferrous material the magnet demagnetises.

         Red Baron Fishing Magnet
             Material: Samarium Cobalt
            Suitable for temperatures up to 250°C

           This magnet will suffer reversible losses with increasing temperature, of the order of 0.28%/deg C
          up to 250 deg C. When cooled, the magnet will recover its magnetism.

         The common forms of reduction of magnetism are:


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 16 از 20 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6200/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  7 (11/94)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  16 of 20

SUBJECT:  FISHING - PROCEDURES AND TOOLS

            1)   Air Gap

             The smallest irregularity in the mating surfaces between the magnet and item being lifted will
                 seriously reduce the effective weight being lifted and holding force available.

              These air gaps can be produced by paint or plating on the surface of the ferrous material on
               which the magnet has been placed, or by roughness of the mating surface. A gap of as little
              as 0.5 mm reduces the pull by 70%.

                  In order to reduce the risk of deterioration of the magnet when in storage, a cover plate should
              be installed.

            2)   Temperature

              Magnetism decreases with increasing temperature.

         Recommended Running Procedure

         RIH to just above the fish. Break circulation to disturb the junk on bottom. Cease circulation and
            tag fish without pumping.

           Pick up and shear out circulating sub. Pump slug and POH.

          Advantages of Permanent Magnets

            a)  Can be run on drillpipe and can utilise the circulation holes in the magnet to eliminate settling
                  of material above the fish or to loosen the fish. To be effective, the magnet must touch the
                     fish.

             Note:
               Consideration should be given to placing an open circulating sub directly above the magnet to
                assistincirculatingthefishclean.

           Disadvantages

            a)  They cannot be flown by helicopter.

            b)  They cannot be turned off when running in hole and may collect iron fillings which prevent a
                  positive contact with the fish.

             Note:
              RefertoBowenchartspriortoselectingamagnet.

        b)  Electro-Magnets

         As with permanent magnets, the lifting capacity of the tool is dependent on the contact area
          between the fish and the tool and bottom hole temperature (the lifting capacity of the magnet
           decreases with increasing temperature).

          Advantages of Electro-Magnets

            a)  They can be transported by helicopter.

            b)  They can be turned on or off so that they do not collect metal filings that could prevent a
                  positive contact with the fish.

             c)   They can be run with a casing collar locator for precise location.

            d)  They can be run with other wireline tools.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 17 از 20 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6200/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  7 (11/94)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  17 of 20

SUBJECT:  FISHING - PROCEDURES AND TOOLS

           Disadvantages

            a)     It is not possible to circulate whilst on bottom. This could have major implications if attempting
                  to fish in an “old” well that has a lot of small iron filings on bottom around the fish. The
              magnet may pick up the small particles preferentially, preventing the fish itself from being
                picked up.

      The specifications for the Schlumberger and Western Atlas tools are shown below. Halliburton Logging
      do not possess an electro-magnet, but do run the Schlumberger and Atlas tools.

       Schlumberger claim that the magnetic field of the CERT tool is momentarily interrupted as the tool
       contacts the fish. A “spike” appears on the current meter and the field current can be monitored all the
      way out of the hole to confirm that the fish is still attached to the magnet.

        Atlas Wireline Services supply both 4.5” OD and 6.75” OD tools, with the following specifications:

     OD                        4.5”                6.75”
       Length                   14.00”             17.20”
       Weight                55 lbs           100 lbs
      Max. Voltage           35 V            55 V
      Max. Amp                2.0 A              1.5 A
      Max. Lifting Power       575 lbs          1680 lbs
       Pressure Rating         15,000 psi        15,000 psi
       Temperature           400°F           400°F

      The maximum lifting power quoted above is based on 100% contact of a 2.0” thick slab. The lifting
      power will decrease according to the amount of contact established with the fish.  Bottom hole
       temperature will have some effect on lifting power, but this has never been a problem in previous fishing
        jobs.

       Schlumberger supply a 5” OD tool, with the following specifications:

        Flat Plate Lift Capacity in Air     1,000 lb
     Maximum Temperature         350°F
     Maximum Pressure             20,000 psi
       Tool OD                     5 in
       Tool Length                  27 in
       Tool Weight                  97 lb
       Guide Shoes available for 7, 7 5/8” and 9 5/8” casing of any weight.
      Minimum residual magnetic field after degausing.

9.4    Tubing Cutters

      These may be chemical or explosive cutters and are used if tubing or packers do not come free after
        pulling with the maximum allowable pull.

     When the packer is pulled free, circulate bottoms up over the choke.

       While pulling out the tubing string, circulate while working the fish past and through tight spots. Ensure
        that the rotary bushings are locked at all times.

9.5    Tubular Perforating (Collars, Drill Pipe & Tubing)

        Introduction

       Following a stuck pipe incident on Bruce Well 9/9a-A07(D4), perforating guns were run to gain
        circulation by perforating through the 8" drill collars using 2 1/8" silver jet charges. Two unsuccessful
       attempts were made even though there was a positive indication of the guns firing.  This was due to
       sloughing of sediment above the original free point. Further the guns themselves became stuck leaving


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 18 از 20 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6200/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  7 (11/94)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  18 of 20

SUBJECT:  FISHING - PROCEDURES AND TOOLS

       the adaptor, gun strip and bull plug downhole. The string was finally severed using a JRC severance
       charge.

       Following the perforating failures, work was initiated to demonstrate the suitability of charges, reasons
         for the guns becoming stuck and make recommendations to prevent re-occurrence in future. The work
      was further expended to address all perforating for drill collars, drill pipe and tubing using either Atlas or
       Schlumberger.

      Recommendations

      2 1/8" Enerjets or Silverjets should be run to perforate 8" DC.

      Use a Fin type bull plug and not full diameter one to allow passage of charge debris.

      The number of shots required will depend on the TFA necessary to achieve the desired circulation rate.

      To reduce the risk of charge debris wedging the toolstring, especially inside a drill collar, the minimum
       shot density should be used (ideally 1 spf). However, to avoid excessive gun lengths, generally it will
      be necessary to increase shot density above 1 spf to provide adequate flow area.

     Run the following toolstring:  Fin type plug, 2-3  ft of 2-4 spf strip guns (Silverjets or Enerjets), a
       magnetic positioning device to hold the shots against the tubular wall, a CCl, plus sufficient tool weight.

        Position the gun carrier to give maximum charge clearance such that the back of the charge is against
       the inside diameter of the pipe to be perforated (as shown below).  This configuration is less likely to
        result in bending of the carrier strip on firing.


                WRONG                 CORRECT                                                                                                  Drill collar

                                          CHARGE





                                                                            Carrier strip





                              DIRECTION OF FIRE                          DIRECTION OF FIRE

       Pressure should not be applied while the charges are being fired as this may result in charge debris
       plugging the newly formed perforations.

     A pack-off and pumping sub will be required at surface to allow circulation to be established after
        perforating.

      Recommended perforating charges and hole diameters by Atlas and Schlumberger for perforating drill
         collars, drill pipe and tubing are summarised in Table 9.5.1.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 19 از 20 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6200/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  7 (11/94)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  19 of 20

SUBJECT:  FISHING - PROCEDURES AND TOOLS


                       TABLE 9.5.1

   Recommended Perforation Charges from Atlas and Schlumberger
              for Perforating Drill Collars, Drill Pipe and Tubing


                                               Average                      Average
                                        Atlas          Exit Hole     Schlumberger     Exit Hole
   Tubular   OD        ID         Charge      Diameter (in)      Charge      Diameter (in)

    Drill Collar   10      3 - 3.75      2 1/8 SJ          0.37         2 1/8 EJ           0.34
               9       2.5 - 3.75      2 1/8 SJ          0.37         2 1/8 EJ           0.34
               8      2.25 - 3.75     2 1/8 SJ          0.37         2 1/8 EJ           0.34
               6.75    2.25 - 3.25     2 1/8 SJ          0.37         2 1/8 EJ           0.34
               4.75    1.75 - 2.81    1 11/16 SJ         0.32        1 11/16 EJ          0.32

     Drill Pipe   6.625      5.965     2 1/8 JJ or SJ     0.26 - 0.37     TP Brown          0.34
               5.00     4.0 - 4.41    2 1/8 JJ or SJ     0.26 - 0.37    TP BR or GR     0.22 - 0.34
                 3.5      2.6 - 2.99    2 1/8 JJ or SJ     0.26 - 0.37    TP BR or GR     0.24 - 0.34
              2.375    1.82 - 1.99    1 11/16 JJ *      0.24 - 0.32      TP YEL           0.35

    Tubing     7      5.92 - 6.54   2 1/8 JJ or SJ     0.26 - 0.37    TP BR or GR     0.23 - 0.34
               5       4.0 - 4.56    2 1/8 JJ or SJ     0.26 - 0.37    TP BR or GR     0.23 - 0.34
                 4.5     3.24 - 4.09   2 1/8 JJ or SJ     0.26 - 0.37    TP BR or GR     0.22 - 0.34
                 3.5     2.44 - 3.07   2 1/8 JJ or SJ     0.26 - 0.37    TP BR or GR     0.23 - 0.34
              2.375    1.70 - 2.04    1 11/16 JJ *         0.24        TP YEL        0.25 - 0.37

  Mneumonics for Charges:

   Atlas:    JJ   Jumbo Jet          Schlumberger:   EJ    Enerjet
          SJ    Silver Jet                      TP   Tubing Puncher
                                                        Brown, Green or Yellow Charges

     * The clearances are small, therefore there is a greater chance of the gun sticking.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 20 از 20 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6200/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  7 (11/94)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  20 of 20

SUBJECT:  FISHING - PROCEDURES AND TOOLS

10.   FISHING TOOL CHECK LIST

      The following “first phase” fishing tools should be on site and in good condition.

      Note:
      Ensurethatallfishingtoolsstipulatedincontractsoncon-tractorrigsareonsiteandingoodcondition.

        1.   Overshots and oversized guides with grapples, baskets and extension subs to catch all sizes of
             tools in the hole.

        2.   Fishing jars to match the DC string in use.

        3.  Bumper subs to match the fishing jar in use.

        4.   Junk Mills with 1/8” gauge tolerance for 12 1/4”, 8 1/2” and 6” holes.

        5.   Jar accelerator to match hydraulic jar in use.

        6.   Reverse or straight circulating baskets for hole size required.  (Use jet reversing type as first
             choice.)

        7.   Junk subs for required hole size.

        8.   Casing spears when running casing, complete with stop rings and pack off assemblies for required
            casing weights.

        9.   Fishing tools to catch electric logging tools (to be supplied by logging company).

       10.  Safety joints and circulating subs.

       11.  Taper taps and die collars (optional).

       12. A hard formation bit, Security H7T or equivalent for 12 1/4”, 8 1/2” and 6” holes.

       13.  Solvents, e.g. Pipe Lax, Mud Ban, etc. in sufficient quantity for the hole section being drilled.


