

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 3 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6250/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  5 (8/94)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  1 of 3

SUBJECT:  STUCK LOGGING TOOLS

If during logging in the open hole, tool sticking occurs, there are two possibilities: the tool itself or the cable is
stuck. In either case, the sticking may be due to several different downhole conditions; differential sticking, key-
seating in a dog-leg etc.

Before rigging up: Check that logging fishing tools are available.

1.    GENERAL POINTS

1.1   ALWAYS make repeat section below the casing shoe.

1.2   KNOW the maximum safe pull you can apply BEFORE the tool gets stuck and the size of the cable.

1.3   NEVER pull more than 9000 lbs on a cable. (2500 lbs on 3/16” cable - breaking strength is 5100 lbs).

1.4   NEVER pull more than 7500 lbs on a spliced cable.

1.5   NEVER pull more than 4500 lbs on the standard weak-points unless you intend to break it, and never
         try to break it except on orders from Shore Base. (Normal safe pull for small cable is 1125+ (depth x
        .80) lbs in order not to break weak point which is 1500 lbs).

      N.B.  Cut-and-threadisobligatoryfortoolswithradio-activesources.

1.6   When calculating the surface tension to apply 4500 lbs to the weak point, REMEMBER to allow for the
       weight of the tool in mud.

1.7     In DEVIATED HOLES, use the “cat-head effect” chart to calculate pull at the weak point.

2.    TOOL STUCK ON BOTTOM

2.1     Pull to maximum safe tension and hold it. Close tool.

3.    TOOL STUCK DURING LOGGING

3.1    Close tool, try to go down.  If tool is free to descend, make several attempts to pass bridge.

3.2       If tool is not free to descend, either tool or cable are stuck. Pull maximum safe tension and hold it.

3.3       If a CST gun becomes differentially stuck, it may be possible to free the tool by firing the guns, whilst
       holding maximum tension on the cable.

4.         If the tool fails to come free after the above have been attempted, stripping over should normally be
      commenced. On no account attempt to break the weak point unless permission has been given
     frombase.  If stripping over, proceed as follows:

4.1    Apply the last known “up logging” tension to the cable.  For floating installations remove the
      compensator and apply this tension over a five minute period. (Position the cable so that the maximum
      heave coincides with this tension.)

4.2    Land cable and cut above rotary table.

4.3    Connect spear head to the hole end of the cable and a spear head overshot to the unit end.

4.4     Strip over the wire with Bowen overshot and drillpipe, stand by stand, maintaining the minimum logging
       tension plus 500 - 1000 lbs.  In deviated wells, occasionally pull the maximum logging tension as this


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 2 از 3 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6250/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  5 (8/94)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  2 of 3

SUBJECT:  STUCK LOGGING TOOLS

       ensures no slack wire is being pushed ahead of the grapple or is bird nesting inside the drillpipe above
       the grapple.

4.5     Prior to latching the fish, a circulating sub and a special bushing to catch the cable are installed, and the
       cable landed in it.

4.6     Install the kelly/top drive and circulate to clean overshot and fish prior to latching.  After circulating,
      remove kelly/top drive, connect spear head overshot to spear head.  Apply the tension determined in
        4.4.

4.7    Lower string and engage the fish. A tension increase when lowering, or tension increase when pulling
       the string upwards indicates the fish is connected. A tension decrease while pulling upwards can
        indicate that the fish is latched.  Similar indications can indicate that the line is caught in the overshot
        (formation, wire damage, attitude of the wireline in the wall of the open hole section).   If these signs
       occur and the overshot is not in the vicinity of the fish, install the circulating sub and circulate in an
       attempt to clear the overshot (move the pipe until the above tension returns).

4.8     After latching onto the fish, part the cable with the travelling block, remove the spearhead overshot
       combination, connect the cable together and wind in.  Pull the string and recover the fish (see Section
         8).

      Note:
      While running in the overshot a decrease in cable tension may occur indicating that the tool has come
       free. In this case the cable is connected and the tool pulled up until the overshot latches onto the
       fishinghead. Theprocedureisthenasbefore.

5.    RECOVERING STUCK TOOL BY BREAKING WEAK POINT

            If hole is in reasonable condition or in casing, a tool can be fished out with good probability using the
       technique of breaking the weak point and fishing with an overshot with OD slightly smaller than bit size.
      To avoid the risk of breaking the cable, unintentionally, never pull more than 9000 lbs on unspliced
        cable.

     Do not use this technique for tools with radioactive sources (refer to Section 8).

6.    NEVER, NEVER suddenly release tension on a cable.  This causes “bird- cages” and broken cables.
       Tension should be released slowly and should never drop below 1/2 the “normal” logging tension.

7.    The Logging Engineer will always direct the operation when applying and releasing tension on the
        cable.

8.    FISHING FOR RADIOACTIVE LOGGING TOOLS

            If a radioactive logging tool sticks in the hole, the following procedure should be adhered to:

        a)  Ensure that the weak point will not be broken. Do not continue endlessly to “work” the tool since
              this may reduce the weak point.

        b)  Inform base and provide all relevant information - position of fish, allowable tension of weak point
          and cable, etc.

        c)  Base will then decide on further action.

        d)  Ensure that the Logging Engineer informs his Shore Base representative.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 3 از 3 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6250/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  5 (8/94)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  3 of 3

SUBJECT:  STUCK LOGGING TOOLS

      Note:
       All work performed with radio-active sources will be conducted in accordance with the Ionising
       RadiationsRegulations1985,No.1333,andtherulesoftheloggingcontractor.

8.1    Fishing Operations

       Regardless of where the fish is stuck the cable will always be cut and threaded through the drillpipe
       (see section 4).

      Ensure the following points are adhered to:

        a)  Circulate once around prior to latching on to the fish.

        b)  Monitor constantly the mud returns with a Gamma Ray tool placed in the return line or close
             thereafter.   If an increase in radiation is detected, then no personnel are to be near mud pits or
            return lines other than the logging contractor.

        c)  Do not locate or engage tool with more than 10,000 lbs weight.

        d)  Discuss with base maximum allowable pull.

        e)  Ensure that with the tool engaged in the overshot, circulation remains possible. Use a circulating
          sub in the fishing assembly one stand above the overshot.

           f)  When the fish has been latched do NOT part the cable at the weak point.  Recover the tool by
             retaining tension on the cable. This will necessitate cutting the cable on each stand pulled.

            If the above procedures fail to recover the tool and  it is important that  it be recovered, a separate
      programme will be issued.

8.2    Handling of Retrieved Source

      The following points should be adhered to:

        a)   Limit rig personnel to the minimum required on the rig floor.

        b)   Pull the source as far as possible in the derrick (minimum 50 ft).

        c)  Cover rotary table, close rams, etc.  All rig personnel except Driller to leave the Rig Floor.

        d)   Driller assists Wireline Contractor in laying down equipment.

8.3   Abandonment of a Source in the Hole

            If all else fails, and a Source has to be abandoned, a separate programme will be issued.


