

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 8 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
            UK Operations              Section    :  6410/GEN

             GUIDELINES FOR           Rev.         :  2 (04/97)
BP EXPLORATION   DRILLING OPERATIONS                                                         Page        :  1 of 8

 SUBJECT:  CASING MILLING

  1.    INTRODUCTION

        Casing Milling is the term given to milling substantial, long sections of casing, following retrieval of the
       uncemented casing string above.

        This has been performed typically on platform wells, where the existing well has been abandoned,
        across the reservoir. The remaining portion of the well has been utilised to allow a new well to be
           drilled when no further slots have been available on the platform.

       Long sections of cemented casing have been successfully milled on Magnus (1990) and Clyde (1990
       and 1991):

       Magnus Well M17 (C5)     580 ft of 9 5/8" 47 lb/ft casing
        Clyde Well A16Z (25)     1726 ft of 13 3/8" 72 lb/ft casing
        Clyde Well A22 (19)       909 ft of 9 5/8" 47 lb/ft casing

       Lessons learnt and techniques developed during these operations have been recorded for future
         reference.

       Optimum overall progress relies on both good downhole milling mechanics (mill cutting characteristics,
       BHA, operating parameters) and the efficient removal of the milled steel cuttings, or swarf.  Either
        aspect may prove the factor which effectively limits the net rate of progress.

       The bulk volume of steel produced in milling is substantial. The effectiveness of the operation depends
         to a large extent on how this material is handled on surface.  Prior to commencement of milling
         operations, appropriate preparations in a number of areas need to be considered to ensure that the
        swarf is removed from the milling fluid and disposed of as efficiently as possible. The swarf produced
        by milling at rates of 20 ft/hr has been effectively handled for several hours without interruptions,
       however well designed surface facilities are essential to sustain such progress.

       The likelihood and probable severity of hole cleaning problems or of blockages on surface must
         increase at higher milling rates. The most cost-effective rate lies somewhere between the maximum
         rate at which steel could be cut and a rate at which progress is virtually continuous. Dayrates and the
         cost/contribution of surface modifications must be included in the assessment.

  2.    SELECTION OF CASING MILLING INTERVAL

       Once the approximate position of the interval has been determined, a number of points should be
        considered in determining the exact interval.

          1.  Well status prior to casing milling operations. Consult cement bond logs to assess the degree of
            casing-cement bonding over the casing section to be milled.  Mechanical performance will be
            improved across well cemented intervals where lateral play is minimised.

          2.  Consult casing string tally to establish position of casing collars and casing jewellry. The section to
           be milled should start either 5 ft above or 15 ft below a casing collar to avoid the casing backing off
            from the coupling.  Plan to mill as few casing collars as possible and finish the milling above a
              coupling.  Couplings typically contain 80 - 120% more steel per unit length than casing and will
              rapidly wear cutting blades.

          3.  Avoid having to mill centralisers if possible.  If this is unavoidable, plan to mill the centralisers at the
            beginning of the section before the blades are dulled. The potential for tool damage is increased
           by the lack of restraint on centraliser and stop collars being able to spin around the casing. Also
             they tend to break into larger pieces and can be difficult to remove.

          4.   Establish contents of annulus fluid and consider relevant mud weights for section previously drilled,
            along with pore pressure, formation integrity and possible zones for potential communication.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 2 از 8 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
            UK Operations              Section    :  6410/GEN

             GUIDELINES FOR           Rev.         :  2 (04/97)
BP EXPLORATION   DRILLING OPERATIONS                                                         Page        :  2 of 8

 SUBJECT:  CASING MILLING

          5.  Consider effect of annulus fluids in contaminating selected milling fluids and required steps to be
             taken.

          6.  The ability to effectively rotate the string and apply milling torque should be assessed by reference
              to the drilling simulator programme (input milling fluid, drillstring and well trajectory data). The high
                frictional forces in deep or highly deviated wells may dictate the use of well lubricated oil muds.

  3.    SWARF REMOVAL AND HANDLING

 3.1     Ideally the majority of the swarf circulated from the well will be removed in a gumbo box arrangement
         situated close to the bell nipple. However, as this facility will not be available in most cases, the routing
        through the primary solids control equipment will be crucial, especially the elimination of undesirable
        swarf traps.

 3.2     All internal restrictions and instrumentation, metering devices, etc. should be removed from the flowline.
        Sections with potential for swarf build-up and blockage may need to be temporarily substituted with
       open trough sections.  Suitable access points for rodding the flowline in order to disturb blockages
        should be provided.  Facility to jet the flowline may be useful - temporary connection from header box
           jetting line?

 3.3    Returns should be directed to feed into the top of shaker header boxes, i.e. "top-dumped".  If practical,
         the lower regions of the box should be plated off so that the swarf "flows" with the mud to the shakers
       and does not build up in the sump. Do not seal off the sump completely as draining through the dump
         valve may be necessary at some stage.

 3.4   The arrangement for managing flow to the shakers may need attention.  Thule shakers have gates
        which lift up to open a slot and perforated guide plates, both features tend to trap swarf and cause it to
          build up.  If not cleared then minor collections of swarf can become major accumulations quite quickly.
      A weir arrangement is recommended in place of the gates and the perforations should be covered with
          thin steel plate.

 3.5    Swarf will tend to bind in the mesh of coarse shaker screens. The finest mesh sizes robust enough to
         withstand the duty should be established quickly.  It should be practical to use 40 or 60 mesh screens
       on the top and 80 or 100 mesh on the bottom.

 3.6       If the cuttings disposal chute is relatively straight, has a large bore and a convenient intersection point,
                it may be a practical means of transporting swarf away from the shakers.  However, be cautious: a
        blocked chute can be difficult to clear. A means of getting the swarf from the chute and into skips, and
          for the regular changing of skips must be devised. A builder's rubbish chute (plastic sections wired
         together, say 14" minimum ID) is a good means of getting the collected swarf into skips placed on a
        lower deck.

 3.7   SAFETYNOTE:
       Metal swarf from casing/tubing milling operations on a well which may have produced even low
        levelsofH2S,maycontainIronSulphidescale.Whensuchscaleisallowedtodryandreactwith
      oxygen in the air, a chemical reaction takes place where the Iron Sulphide is converted to Iron
      Oxide (common rust), and H2S will be released. The reaction is exothermic, i.e. heat will be
       generated. In the presence of other flammable material (including gas which has not been fully
       purged),amoredangeroussituationmaydevelop.

      Measures must be in place to ensure that such swarf and/or joints of casing and tubing is either
      immersed in water (to prevent the oxygenation of the scale, and must therefore be kept wet
         thereafter),orstoredinasafelocationandallowedtodrycompletely.

     As the material (whether fully dried, or immersed in water) is still classified (UN-2793) under the
     UKCarriage of Dangerous Goods Regulations, the back-load manifest MUST be accompanied
     by a Dangerous Goods Declaration. Arrangements for the safe onshore disposal of the material
      mustalsobeinplace.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 3 از 8 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
            UK Operations              Section    :  6410/GEN

             GUIDELINES FOR           Rev.         :  2 (04/97)
BP EXPLORATION   DRILLING OPERATIONS                                                         Page        :  3 of 8

 SUBJECT:  CASING MILLING


      Paragraph 4.5 of BP HSE Practice 10 (Hydrogen Sulphide) contains further details of
       pyrophoricscale.

 3.8   As a guide to the number of skips required, allow 5 - 6,000 lbs of in situ casing steel per skip (e.g. 106 -
       127 feet of 47 ppf 9 5/8" casing). The bulk volume will vary with the form of swarf cut, a skip may be
         physically full before the allowable load is reached. Weigh a 3/4 full skip on the crane to test the actual
          situation. Obviously sufficient skips will be required to complete the job or sustain operations until the
         next scheduled arrival of a supply vessel. As a minimum, maintain sufficient skips on board to sustain 4
        days milling.

 3.9    Grating filters or traps should be placed over drains in the vicinity of the shakers to prevent swarf
         entering and blocking the lines. Simple steel baskets with grating/mesh panels should be fabricated for
          installation in the mud return lines immediately downstream of the shakers and in the pit room to strain
         the flow for small pieces of steel. Ditch magnets should also be positioned in both locations, in pairs.  If
         the facility is available, then mud pump suction strainers should be used - sized for the largest tolerable
        drop in delivery charge pressure.  Strainers and magnets must be checked and cleaned frequently by
         organising a planned cleaning schedule.

 3.10    Milling of long sections of casing results in large transfers of heat energy into the milling fluid - high
        temperatures can be expected (e.g. 180 deg.F while milling at 5600' tvd (Clyde 1991)).  Efficient fume
         extraction and ventilation in the shaker/header box area is required if tolerable working conditions are to
       be maintained. Examine the practicality of improving the natural ventilation by installing louvres or
         temporarily opening up sections of walls.

 3.11   Small rakes with round-ended tines assist in moving swarf off the shaker screens. Shovels and potato
         digging forks will be required for manual handling of swarf.

 3.12   Cleaning points should be established at locations where swarf can build up and where mud spillages
      may occur.

 3.13   The wear bushing profile should present a smooth bore through the wellhead to avoid any tendency for
        swarf to become trapped and build up.

 3.14   Unnecessarily functioning BOPs or circulating through additional equipment and valves should be
        avoided in order to minimise potential damage by swarf to seals and seal areas.

 3.15   In the interests of subsequent equipment and drilling fluid maintenance, it is important that all remaining
        pieces of milled swarf be removed from the surface facilities on completion of operations. The mud
       pumps, lines and valves should be fully inspected. In addition to mud lines and pits, this should include
         the drip tray, trip tank, areas around and under the shakers and places forming natural traps. BOP ram
          cavities, kill and choke lines, standpipe and choke manifolds should be flushed.

  4.    HOLE CLEANING/FLUIDS

        Successful milling depends upon the swarf being efficiently removed from the well. The procedures
        adopted must ensure that the formation of birds nests is avoided.

       The most important criteria for hole cleaning above all others is the annular velocity. At this time, there
        are no full guidelines available on pump rates, hole inclination and mill rates as there are for drilling.
        However, individual cases can be addressed.

      THE DRILLING PROGRAMME MUST STATE THE MINIMUM FLOWRATE TO BE USED.

              It should also be noted that at this time the flowrates will be tentative as the simulator used to develop
         the recommendation is working outside its original design specifications.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 4 از 8 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
            UK Operations              Section    :  6410/GEN

             GUIDELINES FOR           Rev.         :  2 (04/97)
BP EXPLORATION   DRILLING OPERATIONS                                                         Page        :  4 of 8

 SUBJECT:  CASING MILLING

       The milling assembly must be designed to minimise pressure loss. Design must centre on maximising
          flowrate.

       By way of example only, the following illustrations of recent milling operations are given:

       Operation        CasingSize    BehindCasing    Drillpipe     Deviation    Flowrate
                                                              Deg.      gpm

       Window           9 5/8"          Cemented           5"            50/60        520
                                       12 1/4" OH

         Slot Recovery      13 3/8"          20" Casing          5"            8/18          1350/1450
                                      Uncemented

         Slot Recovery      9 5/8"          12 1/4" OH          5"           59           750

 4.1   Mud System - Selection of Mud Type

       The selection of mud type must take account of the following criteria:

        Surface handling system for swarf removal (personnel contact).
       Downhole torque (check drillstring simulator).
         Material behind the casing to be milled (requirement for shale inhibition).
          Logistics.

         a)   Oil Based/Water Based Mud

              In general, it is recommended that water based fluids are used. During the milling operation, a high
            degree of personnel contact with the fluid will be unavoidable in clearing birds nests, collecting and
             disposing of the swarf. Even with the appropriate protective clothing, use of an oil based mud will
              inevitably result in increased levels of skin complaints.  Additionally, there is an increased risk of
            environmental pollution when milling with oil based mud.

         b)  Water Based Mud Types

                     If a water based fluid is used, then consideration must be given to possible shale inhibition
            requirements  if the operation will expose water sensitive formations.  In general,  if the formation
          was previously drilled with oil based mud, a non-inhibitive water based mud can be used as the
            near wellbore formation will be oil saturated.   If the formation was previously drilled with an
               inhibited water based mud, then an inhibitive milling fluid will be required.

            There are several types of water based milling fluid that can be used. These include:

            Bentonite/XC Polymer
            Bentonite/Sodium Bicarbonate
             Bentonite/Mixed Metal Hydroxide

           These are basic systems with no shale inhibition properties.  Details on the fluids can be found in
            Sections 4100/GEN onwards of this manual.   If shale inhibition properties are required, specific
            advice should be sought.

 4.2   Mud Properties

         a)  Mud Weight

         When possible an unweighted system should be applied if a water based mud is in use as this will
              greatly assist logistics. When milling casing across open hole, the mud weight should be that as
           used to initially drill the section.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 5 از 8 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
            UK Operations              Section    :  6410/GEN

             GUIDELINES FOR           Rev.         :  2 (04/97)
BP EXPLORATION   DRILLING OPERATIONS                                                         Page        :  5 of 8

 SUBJECT:  CASING MILLING


         b)  Rheology

          The most important characteristics of the fluid from a swarf lifting consideration is its low shear rate
             rheology. This defines the viscosity of the fluid at the shear rate it experiences in the annulus.

             This is best expressed as the yield stress of the fluid, defined as:

              (2 x 3 rpm reading)  - (1 x 6 rpm reading)

          The following rheological criteria are given as a guideline:

         PV      cP           < 10
         YP        lbs/100 sq ft    50-70
            Gels      lbs/100 sq ft    35 - 50
          Note:
          Withoilbasedmud,itwillbeimpossibletoachievethelowplasticviscositycriteria.

 4.3   Mud Contamination

      Mud contamination by cement from behind the casing may require substantial additions of Sodium
        Bicarbonate to treat the presence of excess Ca ions. A large quantity of sodium bicarbonate should be
         available offshore as a contingency if required.

        Consideration to pre-treating the milling fluid prior to commencement of the milling may also be
         required.

       Should oil base fluids be behind the casing, the expected volumes, treatment and disposal, and
        containment will need addressing.

  5.    MILLING ASSEMBLY

        High steel cutting rates and long mill life cannot be achieved unless
         the casing mill runs smoothly, good stabilisation is essential.

 5.1    The following assembly has proved very successful in milling 9 5/8"
        casing (908 ft milled in 59 rotating hrs, blades 40% worn):

       8 1/2" Taper Mill - 8 1/2" Near Bit Stab - 8 1/2" String Stab - XO - 10
         3/4" Casing Mill - 10 3/4" String Stab - 3 * 8" DC - Jars - 8" DC - XO
            - 9 * HWDP.

 5.2   The components of the pilot assembly (below the mill) should be
         the same size as the casing drift size. The OD of the casing mill
        (Barracuda/Piranha etc.) blades should be slightly larger (up to 1/4"
         greater) than the casing couplings. The stabiliser above the casing
         mill should have the same OD as the dressed mill blades.
          Stabiliser blades should have an open spiral design to allow cut
        swarf to pass freely.  Sharp lead-ins at the start of the blades
        should be avoided.  Limit the number of drill collars to that required
          to provide the maximum weight of mill planned.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 6 از 8 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
            UK Operations              Section    :  6410/GEN

             GUIDELINES FOR           Rev.         :  2 (04/97)
BP EXPLORATION   DRILLING OPERATIONS                                                         Page        :  6 of 8

 SUBJECT:  CASING MILLING

 5.3    There is a real danger of the connections below the casing mill
        backing out with consequent loss of all or part of the pilot assembly.
              It appears that some of the steel cuttings do fall downhole and can
        form a bridge. This could result in having to fish a lost assembly in
         order to allow access for the next milling assembly.

       Use "lock-up type" connections  if available for the pilot assembly,
        otherwise connections should be made up "dry", use of a thread-
         locking compound should also be considered.

        Since the crossover below the casing mill is obviously a point of
         stress concentration and hence is the most susceptible to backing
          out, it is worth giving thought to having the string stab - xo - casing
           mill section of the assembly made up onshore and shipped out as a
           unit.

       Loss of the pilot assembly will cause the mill to wobble or run
         rough; indicated by uneven drillstring behaviour, erratic torque and
        reduced rate of progress. The blades become worn in a tapered
         fashion as the tool is not centralised on the casing stump.

  6.    OPERATING PROCEDURES

       As with any downhole tools, ensure that all lengths and dimensions have been measured before the
        assembly is run. Also confirm that suitable fishing tools are available.

 6.1    Space out the string,  if necessary, so that no connection is required during the initial stages of the
         operation.

 6.2    Lower the assembly to about 5 feet above the top of the casing.   It is advisable to record all available
         information to assist in evaluation of the situation if downhole complications develop - check static and
         rotating hole drags and the free rotating torque.  Record pump pressure at the planned operating
         flowrate and also at a reduced rate (say 50%).

 6.3       If it is necessary to tag the casing, be sure whether it is the taper mill or the casing mill which is taking
         weight. Enter the casing with the pilot assembly - it may be necessary to work the taper mill for a short
         time to establish clear access.

 6.4     Start rotation at a moderate rate (say 120 rpm) with the casing mill blades above the top of the casing
       and slowly run down to touch it with minimum weight. Regard milling as a machining type operation;
         allow the mill to cut its profile before increasing rotary speed and weight.  Continue at a moderate
          milling speed (up to 6 ft/hr, say) for some time to establish that the milled cuttings and swarf are being
       removed from the hole in appropriate volumes.

 6.5    The best rotary speed and weight have to be determined for each job, experiment systematically to find
         the parameters which result in smooth running and a good rate of progress. Normally a rotary speed of
       up to 190 rpm and 4 - 8,000 lbs WOB will be effective.

 6.6    Feeding the drilling line by allowing the drawworks to creep evenly while maintaining a steady weight
        should be the objective, do not allow the weight to drill-off.

 6.7    Increase milling rates only when satisfied that the hole is being cleaned effectively and that the volume
          of swarf can be handled on surface.

 6.8    Unless there is evidence that hard cement is taking a significant portion of the load, then the milling
        weight would not be expected to exceed 10,000 lbs (less for K55 grade material). Slower rotary speeds
        should prolong the life of the mill when cutting P110 or harder grades of steel.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 7 از 8 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
            UK Operations              Section    :  6410/GEN

             GUIDELINES FOR           Rev.         :  2 (04/97)
BP EXPLORATION   DRILLING OPERATIONS                                                         Page        :  7 of 8

 SUBJECT:  CASING MILLING

 6.9    Mark the pipe at the rotary table in 1' intervals and record casing milling data on a proforma sheet for
       each increment as the job progresses. Refer to Appendix A at end of section.

 6.10   Increases in pump pressure are the first indicator of a hole cleaning problem, swarf will aggregate and
         pack-off the annulus in a downhole "birds nest". Reductions in swarf volume at the shakers suggest a
        near surface accumulation or blockage.

 6.11  Pump pressure increases may be small (less than 50 psi) or so large that the pumps have to be slowed
         or even stopped. Cease milling and work the string to attempt to clear the birds nest.  If the nest is in
         the riser, a means of disturbing it is to pull back far enough so that a stabiliser can be made up into the
          string and then worked down to the wellhead.  If a top drive is used, then a stand with a stabiliser at the
        bottom should be racked back to save time in picking it up.

 6.12   Removal of a nest around the drillstring at the bell nipple will require some form of grab or a barbed
        rope spear to be available for running on a drillfloor tugger.

 6.13   Pumping a hi-vis pill after each casing coupling has been milled is recommended.   If the flowline is
        prone to blockage, then  it may be advisable to stop milling and flush or rod  it periodically before  it
         blocks completely.

 6.14   Casing couplings will mill more slowly and may require reduced rotary speed or greater weight. Most
         non-integral couplings are not threaded to the very end, as a result the unthreaded portion breaks free
        as the mill blades approach the lower end of the coupling. The loose ring may break up or become
        trapped and milled, however it may also start to spin on the top of the remaining casing at any stage,
         preventing the mill from biting.  If this occurs then gentle spudding on the ring should cause it to break
       up or become distorted and trapped so that it can be milled up. Stop rings and centralisers can cause a
          similar result and should be treated accordingly.

 6.15     If drillstring is bouncing or rough running starts to occur, then the weight and rotary speed should be
        reduced for a while before attempting to gradually increase the parameters again.

 6.16   Poorly cemented casing may necessitate lower rotary speeds with less applied weight.

 6.17    Milling through badly damaged casing may be problematical and should be avoided  if possible.   If
        unavoidable, then swedging and/or internal dressing may be required to prepare the casing prior to
          milling. Tearing or splitting of severely corroded casing should be minimised by high speeds and light
         weights.

 6.18  On completion of milling, a flat-bottomed junk mill assembly should be run to clean up any debris
        remaining above the casing stump.  Milling of 13 3/8" casing may result in leaving of a cement sheath
        from the former annulus.  It may be necessary to remove this sheath after each mill run to minimise the
          risk of blocks collapsing in on the BHA. The relatively thin sheath around 9 5/8" casing is unlikely to be
         self-supporting and should be less of a problem.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 8 از 8 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
            UK Operations              Section    :  6410/GEN

             GUIDELINES FOR           Rev.         :  2 (04/97)
BP EXPLORATION   DRILLING OPERATIONS                                                         Page        :  8 of 8

 SUBJECT:  CASING MILLING                                APPENDIX A


                                                       DESC.                                                                                  CUTTINGS

                                 (%)                                         WEAR
                                                                                  FLOWRATE                                                                                   SIZE/WEIGHT/GRADE:                                                                  FT/LBS                                                             TORQUE
                            C.S.G.
                                 RPM                                                                       AVERAGE
                               WOMLBS
                               AV.1,000

                               ROP
                               NET(FT/HR)

                                                                                                                                            THE      OPERATIONSSHEET              OPERATOR:                                                                                                                                               3B.                                                                             (FT/HR)                                                                                  ROTATING                                                                                                                                              RUN,3A,                                 ROP
                                                                                                                                            THEe.g.    MILLING                                         TIME          SUMMARY                                                                                                                                                                             OVER                                                       (HRS)                                                   TOTAL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           VARIATIONS,    CASING                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         TRIP.                                         TIME                                                                                                                                                                                      THESE                                                       (HRS)                                                                                                                 NOT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SIGNIFICANTLY                                         ROT.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TIME. BUT                                NUMBER:                                                                                                                                                                 VARY                                        TYPES:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       INDICATE
                                                                                               TO                                                   TOTAL                  WELL    MILL                                                                             FOOTAGE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MILLING      LONG.                                                                                               UP


                                                   <                               OUT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CIRCULATING, 2"                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PARAMETERSSPLIT
                                            (FT)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BOTTOM AND 80%                                                                                               BE
                                                                                                      IS                                                   DEPTH                                                                           ON                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MILLING                    IN                                                                                                                THE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SHOULD         MILLING                                                                                                                                            THE
                                                                                                                                               NO.     BOTH                                                   DEPTH(FT)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DESCRIPTION                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         WHERERUN                                         SER.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       REPRESENTS                                 (FT):       NO.                                     -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TYPICAL                                               -                 INCLUDES

                                                  -                                     STARTED:               MILL                                                                                                                                    NOTES                                                   A                                                                                                                                                                                                   TIME -                                                                                                                                            NO.
                                                                                                                                                                                                       TIME              JOB     DEPTH     RUN                                                                                                                                            RUN                                 NO.
                                         MILL                  DATE    SHOE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GUIDANCE MILL        ROTATING TOTAL CUTTINGS


