

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 9 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
            UK Operations              Section    :  6420/GEN
             GUIDELINES FOR           Rev.         :  1 (04/97)
BP EXPLORATION   DRILLING OPERATIONS                                                         Page        :  1 of 9

 SUBJECT:  SECTION MILLING

  1.    INTRODUCTION

        Section Milling is the term given to removing a section of casing, usually cemented, without disturbing
         the casing string above in "cutting a window".

       The window can then be used as an exit point to allow a new hole section to be drilled by kicking off
        through the window.

       The tools used are commonly known as "section mills" although they are also used effectively in cutting
        casing strings prior to retrieval.

        Section milling operations have been successfully performed on Clyde during 1991:

        Well A22/19       - 125 ft of 13 3/8" 72 lb/ft N80 at 22° deviation
        Well A16Y(25)    -  80 ft of 9 5/8" 53.5 lb/ft N80 at 63° deviation

       Lessons learnt and techniques developed during these operations have been recorded for future
         reference.

       Optimum progress relies on good downhole milling mechanics (mill cutting characteristics, BHA,
         operating parameters) and the efficient removal of the milled steel cuttings, or swarf.

       The cutting of a window will produce substantial volumes of swarf, the removal of which will require
         planning to ensure efficient hole cleaning and effective collection and disposal on surface. Section mills
        are less robust and have much less cutting structure than casing mills;  steel cutting rates will be lower
       and run lengths very much shorter. However, the form of swarf cut may be finer, less spiralled, and
        consequently less prone to tangling. These factors are influences in the selection of milling fluids and in
        determining the extent of modifications justified in surface handling facilities.  Although the emphasis
      may be less critical than for casing milling, the principles remain valid and proper planning should not
       be overlooked.

  2.    SELECTION OF WINDOW INTERVAL

       Once the approximate position of the window has been determined, a number of points should be
        considered in determining the exact interval.

          1.  Well status prior to section milling operations. Consult cement bond logs to assess the degree of
            casing-cement bonding over the casing section to be milled.  Mechanical performance will be
            improved across well cemented intervals where lateral play is minimised.

          2.  Consult casing string tally to establish position of casing collars and casing jewellry. The section to
           be milled should start either 5 ft above or 15 ft below a casing collar to avoid the casing backing off
            from the coupling.  Plan to mill as few casing collars as possible and finish the window above a
              coupling.  Couplings typically contain 80 - 120% more steel per unit length than casing and will
              rapidly wear cutting knives.

          3.  Avoid having to mill centralisers if possible.  If this is unavoidable, plan to mill the centralisers at the
            beginning of the section before the knives are dulled. The potential for tool damage is increased by
             the lack of restraint on centraliser and stop collars being able to spin around the casing. Also they
            tend to break into larger pieces and can be difficult to remove.

          4.   Establish contents of annulus fluid and consider relevant mud weights for section previously drilled,
            along with pore pressure, formation integrity and possible zones for potential communication.

          5.  Consider effect of annulus fluids in contaminating selected milling fluids and required steps to be
             taken.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 2 از 9 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
            UK Operations              Section    :  6420/GEN
             GUIDELINES FOR           Rev.         :  1 (04/97)
BP EXPLORATION   DRILLING OPERATIONS                                                         Page        :  2 of 9

 SUBJECT:  SECTION MILLING

          6.  The ability to effectively rotate the string and apply milling torque should be assessed by reference
              to the drilling simulator programme (input milling fluid, drillstring and well trajectory data). The high
                frictional forces in deep or highly deviated wells may dictate the use of well lubricated oil muds.

  3.    SECTION MILLS - TOOL OPERATION

      A typical section mill tool is shown opposite along with its basic design and operating
          principles.

        Tungsten carbide coated knives are hinge-pinned to the tool and are hydraulically
        actuated to make contact with, and abrade, the casing wall. Depending on its size
       and design, the section mill generally has 3 or 6 knives.

       The basic operating principle is similar to that of underreamers.

      A downward force is created by the pressure drop in the circulating fluid as  it flows
        through an interval nozzle or orifice. The force acts upon a simple piston/cam
        arrangement to open out the knives until they are wedged into contact with the casing
          wall.

       The maximum cutting circle diameter is fixed by selecting knives of the required
         length or by setting a stop to limit the opening travel of the knives. Once opened,
       most tools allow a portion of the fluid flow to bypass the nozzle or even directly onto
        the face of the knives. The consequent reduction in pressure drop is a positive
         surface indication that the initial cut of the casing has been completed.

  4.    SWARF REMOVAL AND HANDLING

 4.1     Ideally the majority of the swarf circulated from the well will be removed in a gumbo
        box arrangement situated close to the bell nipple. However, as this facility will not be
         available in most cases, the routing through the primary solids control equipment will
       be crucial, especially the elimination of undesirable swarf traps.

 4.2     All internal restrictions and instrumentation, metering devices, etc. should be removed from the flowline.
        Sections with potential for swarf build-up and blockage may need to be temporarily substituted with
       open trough sections.  Suitable access points for rodding the flowline in order to disturb blockages
        should be provided.  Facility to jet the flowline may be useful - temporary connection from header box
           jetting line?

 4.3    Returns should be directed to feed into the top of shaker header boxes, i.e. "top-dumped".  If practical,
         the lower regions of the box should be plated off so that the swarf "flows" with the mud to the shakers
       and does not build up in the sump. Do not seal off the sump completely as draining through the dump
         valve may be necessary at some stage.

 4.4   The arrangement for managing flow to the shakers may need attention.  Thule shakers have gates
        which lift up to open a slot and perforated guide plates, both features tend to trap swarf and cause it to
          build up.  If not cleared then minor collections of swarf can become major accumulations quite quickly.
      A weir arrangement is recommended in place of the gates and the perforations should be covered with
          thin steel plate.

 4.5    Swarf will tend to bind in the mesh of coarse shaker screens. The finest mesh sizes robust enough to
         withstand the duty should be established quickly.  It should be practical to use 40 or 60 mesh screens
       on the top and 80 or 100 mesh on the bottom.

 4.6       If the cuttings disposal chute is relatively straight, has a large bore and a convenient intersection point,
                it may be a practical means of transporting swarf away from the shakers.  However, be cautious: a
        blocked chute can be difficult to clear. A means of getting the swarf from the chute and into skips, and


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 3 از 9 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
            UK Operations              Section    :  6420/GEN
             GUIDELINES FOR           Rev.         :  1 (04/97)
BP EXPLORATION   DRILLING OPERATIONS                                                         Page        :  3 of 9

 SUBJECT:  SECTION MILLING

          for the regular changing of skips must be devised. A builder's rubbish chute (plastic sections wired
         together, say 14" minimum ID) is a good means of getting the collected swarf into skips placed on a
        lower deck.

 4.7   SAFETYNOTE:
       Metal swarf from casing/tubing milling operations on a well which may have produced even low
        levelsofH2S,maycontainIronSulphidescale.Whensuchscaleisallowedtodryandreactwith
      oxygen in the air, a chemical reaction takes place where the Iron Sulphide is converted to Iron
      Oxide (common rust), and H2S will be released. The reaction is exothermic, i.e. heat will be
       generated. In the presence of other flammable material (including gas which has not been fully
       purged),amoredangeroussituationmaydevelop.

      Measures must be in place to ensure that such swarf and/or joints of casing and tubing is either
      immersed in water (to prevent the oxygenation of the scale, and must therefore be kept wet
         thereafter),orstoredinasafelocationandallowedtodrycompletely.

     As the material (whether fully dried, or immersed in water) is still classified (UN-2793) under the
     UKCarriage of Dangerous Goods Regulations, the back-load manifest MUST be accompanied
     by a Dangerous Goods Declaration. Arrangements for the safe onshore disposal of the material
      mustalsobeinplace.

      Paragraph 4.5 of BP HSE Practice 10 (Hydrogen Sulphide) contains further details of
       pyrophoricscale.

 4.8   As a guide to the number of skips required, allow 5 - 6,000 lbs of in situ casing steel per skip (e.g. 106 -
       127 feet of 47 ppf 9 5/8" casing). The bulk volume will vary with the form of swarf cut, a skip may be
         physically full before the allowable load is reached. Weigh a 3/4 full skip on the crane to test the actual
          situation. Obviously sufficient skips will be required to complete the job or sustain operations until the
         next scheduled arrival of a supply vessel. As a minimum, maintain sufficient skips on board to sustain
       4 days milling.

 4.9    Grating filters or traps should be placed over drains in the vicinity of the shakers to prevent swarf
         entering and blocking the lines. Simple steel baskets with grating/mesh panels should be fabricated for
          installation in the mud return lines immediately downstream of the shakers and in the pit room to strain
         the flow for small pieces of steel. Ditch magnets should also be positioned in both locations, in pairs.  If
         the facility is available, then mud pump suction strainers should be used - sized for the largest tolerable
        drop in delivery charge pressure.  Strainers and magnets must be checked and cleaned frequently by
         organising a planned cleaning schedule.

 4.10    Milling of long sections of casing results in large transfers of heat energy into the milling fluid - high
        temperatures can be expected (e.g. 180 deg.F while milling at 5600' tvd (Clyde 1991)).  Efficient fume
         extraction and ventilation in the shaker/header box area is required if tolerable working conditions are to
       be maintained. Examine the practicality of improving the natural ventilation by installing louvres or
         temporarily opening up sections of walls.

 4.11   Small rakes with round-ended tines assist in moving swarf off the shaker screens. Shovels and potato
         digging forks will be required for manual handling of swarf.

 4.12   Cleaning points should be established at appropriate locations where swarf can build up and where
      mud spillages may occur.

 4.13   The wear bushing profile should present a smooth bore through the wellhead to avoid any tendency for
        swarf to become trapped and build up.

 4.14   Unnecessarily functioning BOPs or circulating through additional equipment and valves should be
        avoided in order to minimise potential damage by swarf to seals and seal areas.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 4 از 9 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
            UK Operations              Section    :  6420/GEN
             GUIDELINES FOR           Rev.         :  1 (04/97)
BP EXPLORATION   DRILLING OPERATIONS                                                         Page        :  4 of 9

 SUBJECT:  SECTION MILLING

 4.15   In the interests of subsequent equipment and drilling fluid maintenance, it is important that all remaining
        pieces of milled swarf be removed from the surface facilities on completion of operations. The mud
       pumps, lines and valves should be fully inspected. In addition to mud lines and pits, this should include
         the drip tray, trip tank, areas around and under the shakers and places forming natural traps. BOP ram
          cavities, kill and choke lines, standpipe and choke manifolds should be flushed.

  5.    HOLE CLEANING/FLUIDS

        Successful milling depends upon the swarf being efficiently removed from the well. The procedures
        adopted must ensure that the formation of birds nests is avoided.

       The most important criteria for hole cleaning above all others is the annular velocity. At this time, there
        are no full guidelines available on pump rates, hole inclination and mill rates as there are for drilling.
        However, individual cases can be addressed.

      THE DRILLING PROGRAMME MUST STATE THE MINIMUM FLOWRATE TO BE USED.
               It should also be noted that at this time the flowrates will be tentative as the simulator used to develop
         the recommendation is working outside its original design specifications.

       The milling assembly must be designed to minimise pressure loss. Design must centre on maximising
          flowrate.

       By way of example only, the following illustrations of recent milling operations are given:

       Operation        CasingSize    BehindCasing    Drillpipe     Deviation    Flowrate
                                                              Deg.      gpm

       Window           9 5/8"          Cemented           5"            50/60        520
                                       12 1/4" OH

         Slot Recovery      13 3/8"          20" Casing          5"            8/18          1350/1450
                                      Uncemented

         Slot Recovery      9 5/8"          12 1/4" OH          5"           59           750

 5.1   Mud System - Selection of Mud Type

       The selection of mud type must take account of the following criteria:

        Surface handling system for swarf removal (personnel contact).
       Downhole torque (check drillstring simulator).
         Material behind the casing to be milled (requirement for shale inhibition).
          Logistics.

         a)   Oil Based/Water Based Mud

              In general, it is recommended that water based fluids are used. During the milling operation, a high
            degree of personnel contact with the fluid will be unavoidable in clearing birds nests, collecting and
             disposing of the swarf. Even with the appropriate protective clothing, use of an oil based mud will
              inevitably result in increased levels of skin complaints.  Additionally, there is an increased risk of
            environmental pollution when milling with oil based mud.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 5 از 9 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
            UK Operations              Section    :  6420/GEN
             GUIDELINES FOR           Rev.         :  1 (04/97)
BP EXPLORATION   DRILLING OPERATIONS                                                         Page        :  5 of 9

 SUBJECT:  SECTION MILLING

         b)  Water Based Mud Types

                     If a water based fluid is used, then consideration must be given to possible shale inhibition
            requirements  if the operation will expose water sensitive formations.  In general,  if the formation
          was previously drilled with oil based mud, a non-inhibitive water based mud can be used as the
            near wellbore formation will be oil saturated.   If the formation was previously drilled with an
               inhibited water based mud, then an inhibitive milling fluid will be required.

            There are several types of water based milling fluid that can be used. These include:

            Bentonite/XC Polymer
            Bentonite/Sodium Bicarbonate
             Bentonite/Mixed Metal Hydroxide

           These are basic systems with no shale inhibition properties.  Details on the fluids can be found in
            Sections 4100/GEN onwards of this manual.   If shale inhibition properties are required, specific
            advice should be sought.

 5.2   Mud Properties

         a)  Mud Weight

         When possible an unweighted system should be applied if a water based mud is in use as this will
              greatly assist logistics. When milling casing across open hole, the mud weight should be that as
           used to initially drill the section.

         b)  Rheology

          The most important characteristics of the fluid from a swarf lifting consideration is its low shear rate
             rheology. This defines the viscosity of the fluid at the shear rate it experiences in the annulus.

             This is best expressed as the yield stress of the fluid, defined as:

              (2 x 3 rpm reading)  - (1 x 6 rpm reading)

          The following rheological criteria are given as a guideline:

         PV      cP           < 10
         YP        lbs/100 sq ft    50 - 70
            Gels      lbs/100 sq ft    35 - 50

          Note:
          Withoilbasedmud,itwillbeimpossibletoachievethelowplasticviscositycriteria.

 5.3   Mud Contamination

      Mud contamination by cement from behind the casing may require substantial additions of Sodium
        Bicarbonate to treat the presence of excess Ca ions. A large quantity of sodium bicarbonate should be
         available offshore as a contingency if required.

        Consideration to pre-treating the milling fluid prior to commencement of the milling may also be
         required.

       Should oil base fluids be behind the casing, the expected volumes, treatment and disposal, and
        containment will need addressing.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 6 از 9 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
            UK Operations              Section    :  6420/GEN
             GUIDELINES FOR           Rev.         :  1 (04/97)
BP EXPLORATION   DRILLING OPERATIONS                                                         Page        :  6 of 9

 SUBJECT:  SECTION MILLING

  6.    SECTION MILLING ASSEMBLY

 6.1     Efficient operation requires the tool to be well centralised.

       The taper mill and pilot stabilisers should be the same size as the casing
            drift diameter.

       The section mill body diameter should be the largest available to
         comfortably run inside the casing so that the knives are as short, and as
         strong, as possible.

         Limit the number of drill collars to that required to provide the maximum
        anticipated milling weight.  Jar placement should be determined for
         operating effect (keep above top of window at all times).

 6.2   Recommended general assemblies (add crossovers as necessary):

         a)   Straight Hole

            Taper Mill - Near Bit Stabiliser - Section Mill - 4-6 DC - Jars - 1-2 DC -
         HWDP.

         b)  Deviated Hole

            Taper Mill - Near Bit Stabiliser - Short DC - String Stabiliser - Section
                Mill -  4-6 DC - Jars - 1-2 DC - HWDP.

         Alternatives may be justified for specific tasks and sets of circumstances.

 6.3    There is a danger of the connections below the section mill working
        loose with consequent loss of all or part of the pilot assembly.  "Lock-up"
        type connections should be used  if available, otherwise connections
       should be made up "dry" and use of a thread-locking compound
         considered.

  7.    OPERATING PROCEDURES

 7.1     Fluid circulation rates through section mills are limited by the size of the fluid courses and by the knife-
         actuating forces developed.  If the tool features an interchangeable nozzle/orifice then the size selected
        should be consistent with a flowrate adequate for hole cleaning purposes.

 7.2    The required diameter of the knife cutting circle will depend on casing string to cut/mill across an open
         hole section. The cut should be positioned 10 -1 5 feet below a casing coupling to make best use of the
        enforced stand-off between the strings.

 7.3    Sets of knives can vary in shape, excessively high point-loading could result;  check that each set,
         including spares, are similar.

        Hinge pins do sometimes bend in service; confirm that spares are available.

               If more than one style of tungsten/carrier matrix is available, confirm that the most suitable is used -
         generally the hardest, most resilient category.

 7.4   As with any downhole tools, ensure that all lengths and dimensions have been recorded before the
        assembly is run. Also confirm that suitable fishing tools are available.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 7 از 9 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
            UK Operations              Section    :  6420/GEN
             GUIDELINES FOR           Rev.         :  1 (04/97)
BP EXPLORATION   DRILLING OPERATIONS                                                         Page        :  7 of 9

 SUBJECT:  SECTION MILLING

 7.5    Function test the tool at surface. Pump through the tool at the "cutting-out" flowrate with the knife travel
          restricted to the casing ID  (if practical) and then fully opened.  Increase circulation to the full milling
          flowrate.

       Record the pressures at each stage, this is useful information when starting the actual operation.
       Check that the knives have opened fully to an even cutting circle.

 7.6    Pin the knives back into the body with insulating tape, string or slivers of wood.  If left loose, the knives
        are prone to hanging up in the wellhead and recesses in the casing string.

 7.7     Drift the whole drillstring with proper, near-size rabbits. Loose cement or scale may block the tool or
         impair its operation.

 7.8   Run the mill to the bottom of the proposed window to ensure that the casing bore is clean.

 7.9     Pull back and take string up, down and rotating drags - without pumps.

 7.10   Attempt to locate a casing collar so that the window may be accurately positioned.

        Using the casing running tally depths as a guide, start 20 feet above the expected collar depth and
       open the knives with a low pump rate. Run down slowly, without rotation, watching for a loss of string
        weight as the knives drop into a collar recess. Repeat the procedure to be sure.

         Finding the recess between Buttress-threaded joints should be straight-forward. Do not be surprised if
                it proves impossible to locate the relatively slight recess in a Vam casing coupling (try across a 90 foot
          interval to include 2 couplings).

 7.11   Space out the drillstring to give maximum working height above the rotary table at the start of the cut.
         Floating rigs can be (de)ballasted to increase the interval between connections.

 7.12  A marine swivel landed in the wellhead is required in making the initial cut from floating rigs. The other
        response of motion compensators when relatively low applied weight is required restricts the use of
         section mills to conditions of low heave amplitude.  Repeated spudding/weight surging of the knives
        onto the open cut is likely to result in premature failure of the cutting structure.

  8.    CUTTING AND MILLING OPERATION

 8.1     Position the mill knives at the selected cut point and start rotation at 50 - 80 rpm, note the free rotating
         torque.

         Bring the pumps up to the "cut-out" rate (dependent on the size of tool and the internal nozzle fitted),
        note the pump pressure and the increase in rotating torque. Provided the torque fluctuations are within
        acceptable limits and the drillstring is running smoothly, allow the tool to make the initial cut - be patient,
         the cut may take 5 - 30 minutes.

               If the tool has a feature increasing the flow area when the knives fully extend (see Introduction, para. 2),
       a pressure drop will clearly indicate when the cut is completed. Torque changes will also be apparent.
       Be wary of heavy annulus fluids U-tubing into the well. Do not move the tool but increase pump speed
          to give the full operating flowrate while the cut is fully opened so that the knives can sit evenly on the
         casing.

 8.2    Increase rotary speed and apply weight gradually to initiate a moderate milling rate (4 - 5 ft/hr, say).
        Continue at this rate for some time to establish that the milled cuttings and swarf are being removed
        from the hole in appropriate volumes. Once satisfied that the hole is being cleaned and that the volume
          of swarf can be handled on surface, the milling rate can be further increased.

 8.3    The best rotary speed and weight on mill have to be determined for each job, experiment systematically
          to find the parameters which result in smooth running and a good rate of progress.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 8 از 9 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
            UK Operations              Section    :  6420/GEN
             GUIDELINES FOR           Rev.         :  1 (04/97)
BP EXPLORATION   DRILLING OPERATIONS                                                         Page        :  8 of 9

 SUBJECT:  SECTION MILLING

 8.4    Maintain a steady weight by allowing the drawworks to creep and feed drilling line evenly. Do not allow
         the weight to drill-off each time before slacking off line.

 8.5    Mark the pipe at the rotary table in 1' intervals and record milling data on a proforma sheet for each
         increment:

          Depth      Time     ROP     RPM    WOB     Torque    Flowrate   Pressure


 8.6    Increases in pump pressure are the first indicator of a hole cleaning problem, swarf will aggregate and
         pack-off the annulus in a downhole "birds nest". Reductions in swarf volume at the shakers suggest a
        near surface accumulation or blockage.

 8.7   Pump pressure increases may be small (less than 50 psi) or so large that the pumps have to be slowed
         or even stopped. Cease milling and work the string to attempt to clear the birds nest.  If the nest is in
         the riser, a means of disturbing it is to pull back far enough so that a stabiliser can be made up into the
          string and then worked down to the wellhead.  If a top drive is used, then a stand with a stabiliser at the
        bottom should be racked back to save time in picking it up.

 8.8    Removal of a nest around the drillstring at the bell nipple will require some form of grab or a barbed
        rope spear to be available for running on a drillfloor tugger.

 8.9    Pumping a hi-vis pill after each casing coupling has been milled is recommended.   If the flowline is
        prone to blockage, then  it may be advisable to stop milling and flush or rod  it periodically before  it
         blocks completely.

 8.10   Casing couplings will mill more slowly and may require reduced rotary speed or greater weight. Most
         non-integral couplings are not threaded to the very end, as a result the unthreaded portion breaks free
        as the mill knives approach the lower end of the coupling. The loose ring may break up or become
        trapped and milled, however it may also start to spin on the top of the remaining casing at any stage,
         preventing the mill from biting.  If this occurs then gentle spudding on the ring should cause it to break
       up or become distorted and trapped so that it can be milled up. Stop rings and centralisers can cause a
          similar result and should be treated accordingly.

 8.11     If drillstring is bouncing or rough running starts to occur, then the weight and rotary speed should be
        reduced for a while before attempting to gradually increase the parameters again.

 8.12   Poorly cemented casing may necessitate lower rotary speeds with less applied weight.

 8.13  As the knives become completely worn down, the casing will be skimmed for a while before the tool
          starts to fall down inside - watch for torque changes and increased ROP at low weights.  Pull back and
         locate the true lower end of the window by running down without rotation to sit the worn knife stubs on
         the casing.

 8.14  Once the window is complete, or the knives worn out, ensure that the hole is circulated clean before
      POOH. The point at which changes in swarf size/form and volume is observed at the shakers can
         provide a good indication of the efficiency of hole cleaning. Turn off the pumps and rotate the string for
       a few minutes to persuade the knives to collapse into the tool body. Take care when withdrawing the
           mill and stabilisers back through the top of the window.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 9 از 9 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
            UK Operations              Section    :  6420/GEN
             GUIDELINES FOR           Rev.         :  1 (04/97)
BP EXPLORATION   DRILLING OPERATIONS                                                         Page        :  9 of 9

 SUBJECT:  SECTION MILLING

 8.15     If the window is not completed with the first mill run, then the following precautions should be observed
       on subsequent runs:

         a)  Break circulation above the casing window to confirm that the knives do close again afterwards.

         b)  Open the knives at the top of the window and lightly ream through the section - set torque limiter at
          minimum position to maintain rotation only.

          c)  Cut a profile on the casing stump with the new knives at minimal weight before resuming the
            window.

 8.16  A subsequent run with a rock-type underreamer may be considered if it is vital to remove all debris from
         the window or to produce a consistent open hole diameter.


