

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 7 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6430/SEM

                                                                  Rev.         :  0 (9/92)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  1 of 7

SUBJECT: CASING MILLING AND UNDERREAMING FOR OPEN HOLE GRAVEL PACK

1.    INTRODUCTION

       Casing Section milling operations are comprehensively discussed in Section 6420/GEN of the Drilling
       Manual. This section gives additional guidance on section milling and underreaming operations from a
       Semi-Submersible required to open a section of casing in order to complete an open hole Gravel Pack
       Operation.  It should be read in conjunction with the Section 6420/GEN and 6300/GEN.

        Milling and underreaming operations for an open hole gravel pack have been carried out on the Sea
       Explorer in 1992 as follows:

      Donan Well 15/20a-6RE   14m of 29 lb/ft L80 VAM liner at 51 degrees deviation

      The lessons learnt and the techniques followed during this operation are recorded for future use.

      The major operational differences between the Gravel Pack operation and conventional milling
       operations are:

        1.  Accuracy of milled section. The milled section required for gravel pack operations is equivalent to
            the perforated interval required on conventional wells, therefore similar accuracies to ensure the
            milled section is on depth are needed.

        2.  The required interval for carrying out a gravel pack operation will not always coincide with the
          optimum location for section milling operations. The section milling operation may therefore involve
             additional risks that would be avoided on normal section milling jobs.

        3.  Rig Movement.  Operations must take account of the rig movement when milling from a Semi-
           Submersible Unit.  This is especially relevant in highly deviated wells. The combination of high
           drags and rig heave can seriously hamper depth control and the overall success of the milling and
          underreaming operation.

        4.   Solids Contamination of the System. The milled section is required to be used for Gravel Pack
           Operations, consequently all operations required to achieve this must be planned to minimise any
            formation damage.

        5.  The section to be milled will generally be across a hydrocarbon bearing reservoir.  Although well
             control measures should be considered in all section milling operations, they become more critical
              in the reservoir section.

        6.  The section to be drilled will generally have a small ID, requiring small, fragile tools, which are very
            sensitive to applied loads.

2.    SELECTION OF INTERVAL

      The interval to be milled is dependent on the required Gravel Pack Interval as determined by
       Petroleum/Reservoir Engineering considerations, however at the planning stage  it is critical to assess
       the additional risks of milling the desired section, i.e:

        1.  Condition of cement behind casing. Consult CBL/VDL and CET logs to determine the condition of
          cement behind the casing.  It is unlikely that the Petroleum/Reservoir Engineering requirements for
          zone isolation would be satisfied  if the cement bond was poor, however poorly cemented casing
                will result in possible milling difficulties due to lateral play of the cut casing.

        2.  Consult the casing tally to determine the position of casing collars and cementing jewellery behind
            the casing.  If the selected interval starts immediately below a casing collar, there is additional risk
             of the casing stub backing out and dropping onto the cutting assembly.  In well cemented casing,
            the milled section has been successfully milled from 3m below a casing collar.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 2 از 7 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6430/SEM

                                                                  Rev.         :  0 (9/92)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  2 of 7

SUBJECT: CASING MILLING AND UNDERREAMING FOR OPEN HOLE GRAVEL PACK

        3.    It is not necessary to mill a large safety margin above the milled window. Both the section milling
             tool and underreamer will be referenced to the same depth and should be successfully open within
          0.3m of the required depth. The underreaming operation should be designed to start about 0.5
          below the top of the milled window.

        4.  Avoid milling and subsequently underreaming mudstone sections at the top and bottom of the
             interval as this will incorporate unwanted drilled solids into the fluid system which may result in
            formation damage.

        5.    If the section to be gravel packed has been identified prior to running casing/liner, Bakerlock the
           casing joints at the top of the window. Ensure the casing is well centralised immediately above and
          below the section to be cut but minimise the use of bowspring centralisers and stop collars in the
            section to be cut.  All cementing jewellery across the section should be selected to minimise the
             possibility of rotating when being milled.  Ensure a Radioactive marker is run in the casing
           approximately 60m above the top of the interval.

3.    PREPARATION

        1.  The interval to be milled and underreamed should be agreed with Petroleum/Reservoir Engineering
          and the Asset Group and should be referenced to a specific Log.

        2.  A good copy of the CBL/VDL/GR showing the RA marker, interval to be cut and the top of the liner
        PBR should be available on the rig. EnsurethatthislogisondepthwiththeReferenceLog.

        4.  The top of the liner PBR should have been dressed off to ensure that there is no cement above the
            top of the PBR as this will be the reference depth where the cutting assembly will land off.

4.    SWARF REMOVAL AND HANDLING

        1.  The initial cut should be made in a separate run using a casing cutter and marine swivel assembly
              in order to compensate for the effects of heave. The distance from the PBR to the casing cut
           should be accurately determined from the CBL/VDL log. A casing cutter will be used to make the
                initial cut in order to give at least a 4 inch cut to ensure that the following section mill run will
             positively locate in the cut section. Use of a section mill to make the initial cut would result in a
            smaller cut being made and may result in difficulty locating the cut section, especially if the well is
            highly deviated.

        2.  Recommended general assembly:

           For cutting 7" liner:

            6" (for 29 lb/ft casing) Taper Mill with stabilised section
          5 9/16" Pipe Cutter c/w 11 1/2" opening knives
            6" stabiliser (for 29 lb/ft casing)
          1 stand 3 1/2" drillpipe
          3 1/2" IF RA marker sub
          3 1/2" Drillpipe and pup joints
          8 1/4" OD Marine Swivel
          1 x HWDP
        DS
          14 x HWDP
            5" DP to surface

         The length of 3 1/2" drillpipe and pup joints should be chosen so that the cutter knives are on depth
            with the Marine Swivel landed on the PBR. Ensure a good selection of different length pup joints is
            available on the rig.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 3 از 7 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6430/SEM

                                                                  Rev.         :  0 (9/92)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  3 of 7

SUBJECT: CASING MILLING AND UNDERREAMING FOR OPEN HOLE GRAVEL PACK

           For cutting full string 7" casing:

         The appropriate Marine Swivel to land in the wellhead should be used. 3 1/2" pup joints should be
           placed at the top of the string to allow them to be changed out if the string is pulled back to adjust
            the spaceout. Due to stretch in the string and the effect of torque and pumping forces shortening
            the string, this spaceout will not be as accurate as when the Marine Swivel is landing on the liner
             top.

         The length of knives used should be long enough to produce a minimum 4" high cut in the casing
             to enable the section mill to locate positively in the cut.

              All tubulars between the casing cutter and the RA Marker sub should be measured and tallied
           independently by the Drilling Contractor and the BP Rep/DE to ensure that the critical spaceout is
             correct. Steel line strap the string from the casing cutter to the Marine Swivel.

               Drift the string to ensure GR/CCL tool will pas through string to top of cutter.

          There is a danger of connections below the section mill working loose with consequent loss of part
             of the pilot assembly. Lock up type connections should be used if available, otherwise connections
           should be made up "dry".

        3.  Function test the operation of the cutter on surface prior to running. Wedge or tape the knives back
              in place. Do not break circulation when running in the hole as the knives are likely to open,
            preventing the string from entering the PBR.

        4.  Record up/down/rotating weights prior to landing the Marine Swivel. 40 ft bails should be rigged up
              for wireline logging before landing.

        5.  Rotate the string slowly and land off the Marine Swivel on the PBR. Slack off 10,000 lbs.

        6.  Rig up electric wireline through drillstring. Run GR/CCL log to confirm depth of casing cutter.
          Ensure the wireline is compensated relative to the string.   If the casing cutter is not on depth, the
             string will have to be pulled back to below the Marine Swivel and the spaceout adjusted using pup
              joints.

        7.  Rig down the wireline and 40 ft bails and make up top drive/kelly.

        8.  Rotate the string slowly and re-land the Marine Swivel with 6-8000 lbs. The response of motion
          compensators with low applied weight is often poor.   If the rig heave dictates, slack off additional
           weight on the Marine Swivel, within its operating limits, to ensure the swivel does not bounce
            during the cutting operation, leading to failure of the knives.  Slack off weight should not exceed
           15,000 lbs.

        9.  Make the cut as per Section 6300/GEN.

5.    SECTION MILLING OPERATION

       Section milling operation should be carried out in accordance with Section 6420/GEN.

        1.  Recommended General Assembly:

           For Section Milling 7" Liner

            6" Taper Mill (for 29 lb/ft 7" liner)
          5 1/2" Section Mill
            Jetted Top Sub
         X/O as required
          1 x 4 3/4" DC


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 4 از 7 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6430/SEM

                                                                  Rev.         :  0 (9/92)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  4 of 7

SUBJECT: CASING MILLING AND UNDERREAMING FOR OPEN HOLE GRAVEL PACK

        RA Marker Sub
          8 x 4 3/4" DCs
            Jar
          2 x 4 3/4" DCs
          3 1/2" DP
            5" DP

         The use of a circulating sub (preferably a re-cockable sub, as supplied by PBL) is strongly
          recommended, to allow a high rate clean-up above the PBR, and the break up of birdsnests.

         The jetted top sub is run to increase the circulating rate to improve hole cleaning whilst ensuring
              sufficient differential pressure is applied across the section milling tool for it to operate.  Sizing of
            the jets should be carried out in conjunction with the Section Milling Service Company, based on
            the recommended flowrate required to keep the hole clean.  Ensure the top sub is jetted to the
         minimum acceptable size, and that at least 30% of the flow is directed through the section mill tool,
           otherwise there may be insufficient hydraulic horsepower available to keep the cutters open, and
               tell-tale pressure drops will be less evident.

        A dart sub should be run in the string.

        2.  The cutting structure of the Servo "Millmaster" has a proven track record in producing small metal
            chippings; this is essential for good hole cleaning.

        3.   After section milling the required interval, perform a cleanout trip to remove any cuttings and swarf
             in the milled section. Use a taper mill/string mill assembly. A PBR dressing mill should be
            available on the rig to clean up the top of the liner.  Whilst running in hole, break circulation and
             circulate regularly to prevent running into swarf and packing off.

        Drilling Fluid Requirements

        1.  Section milling fluid systems are discussed in Section 6420/GEN. Ensure that any filtrate invasion
           from the selected fluid will be non-damaging to the reservoir.

        2.  The combination of high YP (50-70) required for hole cleaning and swarf removal, the small
           annular clearance between the section mill assembly and the selection of the section mill fluid
          bypass area will result in a considerable swab and surge pressure being generated when moving
           the assembly.  There is also the possibility of swarf birdsnests forming which will also create
          swabbing problems.

                   It is critical that swab and surge calculations are performed in the planning stage when specifying
            the density of the milling fluid.  Sufficient trip margin must be allowed for. The normal 200 psi
               drilling overbalance will not be sufficient in many cases. Trip speeds must be restricted to ensure a
           safe overbalance is maintained.

        3.  High mud YPs may also result in oil or gas entrainment in the mud which will be difficult to remove.
         The mud should be routed through the degasser to remove the gas, however progressive
             circulations may not bring the gas levels down quickly.

        4.  Fine milled cuttings may be produced during the section milling operation which will increase
            formation damage. Returns should be routed through the mud cleaner to maximise removal of all
              drilled/milled solids. Ensure ditch magnets are located in the returns trough throughout the milling
          and underreaming operations.

        5.  When section milling 7" liner or casing, due to the low circulating rates and annular velocity, it will
          be necessary to circulate the riser clean using a riser boost line or through the kill or choke line.
           This will help in the prevention of a birdsnest forming in the riser.

        6.  The milling fluid should be displaced to a non-damaging underreaming fluid during the cleanout trip
             at the end of milling operations. The mud pits and entire surface circulating and mixing system


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 5 از 7 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6430/SEM

                                                                  Rev.         :  0 (9/92)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  5 of 7

SUBJECT: CASING MILLING AND UNDERREAMING FOR OPEN HOLE GRAVEL PACK

           should be thoroughly cleaned and flushed to remove all solids contamination that may result in
            formation damage. The Fluids policy should identify all measures to be taken to clean the mud
          system and displace to the underreaming fluid.

        7.  Operate BOP rams during flushing process to remove swarf from cavities.

6.    UNDERREAMING OPERATION

        In order to underream the gravel pack zone to the required hole diameter, a 3 bladed drag type
      underreamer will be required.  Cutters should be selected to be able to cut and remove any steel
       remaining in the interval without destruction of the blades, i.e. Smith tungsten "Millmaster" cutters with
      diamond enhanced gauge protection.

      The cutter opening diameter will be dependent upon the gravel packing requirements. The 5 7/8"
       Servco underreamer provides a maximum cut of 14". This maximum cut should be avoided due to the
        additional stresses on the blades when underreaming in the presence of junk, and in unstabilised over
      gauge hole.  Over stressing of the blades may lead to a failure of the body or blades.  Select the
      minimum blade size required to satisfy the gravel pack criteria.

     A full NDT inspection of the Drag type underreamer high stress areas should be carried out before
       shipping to the rig.  This should include the internal areas at the reduced cross section of the blade
        retaining pins.

        Full material traceability of the underreamer is required.  It is recommended for work in small diameter
        holes, that the tool is especially manufactured from a high strength alloy  (if time allows).  Particular
        attention should be paid to Charpy notch toughness values.

        1.  Recommended General Assembly:

           For 7" liner

          5 3/4" drag type underreamer
              Bit Sub
           Short DC
            6" String Stab
           Short DC
            6" String Stab
          1 x 4 3/4" DC
            6" String Stab
          1 x 4 3/4" DC
        RA Marker Sub
          11 x 4 3/4" DC
            Jar
          2 x 4 3/4" DC
          3 1/2" DP
         X/O
          8 1/2" Soft Bladed Stab
          1 x HWDP
        DS 2 x HWDP
            5" DP to surface

         The 8 1/2" stabiliser is run to correlate the depth relative to the top of the PBR.  It should be spaced
            out to tag the top of the PBR when the underreamer is approximately 20m below the bottom of the
          underreamed section. This will allow the string to be worked below the cut section if required.  If a
                 full string of casing has been run, then the stabiliser will not be run.  Correlation will have to be
         made with a GR/CCL logging tool using the RA marker subs in the casing and underreaming string.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 6 از 7 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6430/SEM

                                                                  Rev.         :  0 (9/92)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  6 of 7

SUBJECT: CASING MILLING AND UNDERREAMING FOR OPEN HOLE GRAVEL PACK

              All tubulars between the casing cutter and the RA marker sub should be measured and tallied
           independently by the Drilling Contractor and the BP Rep/DE to ensure that the spaceout is correct.
            Steel line strap the string from the underreamer to 8 1/2" stabiliser.

               Drift the string to ensure GR/CCL tool will pass through the string to the top of the underreamer.

             In high angle holes, or when the underreamed section is greater than 15m long, a pilot assembly
          below the underreamer may be necessary to prevent the risk of sidetracking. A taper mill and 6"
              stabiliser should be used below the underreamer.  There is a danger of connections below the
          underreamer working loose with consequent loss of part of the pilot assembly. Connections should
          be made up "dry".

        2.  Function test the operation of the underreamer on surface prior to running.  Ensure the knives
             retract when the pumps are stopped.  If the underreamer does not have a positive opening system,
           tape or wedge the knives in the closed position. Do not break circulation when running in the hole
          as the knives are likely to open preventing the string from entering the PBR.  If the string has to be
               filled whilst running in the hole, ensure the fluid density is the same as that in the hole. A
            hydrostatic differential between the string and the annulus may be sufficient to open the knives
            preventing entry into the PBR.

        3.  Record up/down rotating weights prior to entering the open hole section.

        4.  Rotate the string slowly and tag the PBR with the 8 1/2" stabiliser to give an accurate depth for the
          underreamer.  Strap out of the hole to put the underreamer at the top of the section to be
          underreamed. Hold the string in this position until the arms have fully opened. Adjust the pipe tally
             to ensure the maximum interval can be underreamed prior to making the first connection.

         Note:
        The response of motion compensators to low applied weight on bit is often poor. Success of the
           operation relies heavily on maintaining steady operating parameters. The underreaming operation
          shouldthereforenotbeattemptedinmorethan2-3feetofrigheave.

        5.  Bring up the pumps without string rotation and record the pressure with the underreamer arms in
            the closed position. Stop the pumps. Start rotating the string. Bring up the pumps smoothly to the
           pre-recorded rate to start opening the underreamer. Monitor the pump pressure closely to observe
            the tell-tale pressure drop indicating when the knives have fully opened. Slowly set weight on bit to
            establish a cutting shelf.

         Note:
       Do not rely solely on the tell-tale pressure drop to indicate the arms are fully open. The pressure
         drop may not be very evident, and at the beginning of circulation other factors may cause pressure
          drops.

        6.  Continue underreaming the interval. As soon as a steady underreaming torque has been
            established, set the torque limiter to slightly above this level to keep the string rotating.  Monitor
            closely the torque and progress when approaching milled casing collars, centralisers or other signs
             of junk.

        7.  At the end of the interval, stop rotating and with pumps on tag the top and bottom of the
          underreamed interval to confirm the full interval has been cut.

        8.  Perform a cleanout run with a taper mill and string mill assembly to ensure there are no
            obstructions through the underreamed section.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 7 از 7 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  6430/SEM

                                                                  Rev.         :  0 (9/92)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  7 of 7

SUBJECT: CASING MILLING AND UNDERREAMING FOR OPEN HOLE GRAVEL PACK

7.    CONFIRMATION OF UNDERREAMED INTERVAL

        1.  A GR/CCL/CAL log can be run to confirm the hole gauge and section length over the underreamed
              interval.

        2.  To allow for tide, run a line from the top of the riser to the drill floor. Knot the line, and mark the drill
            pipe.

                Drill the required interval, and check directly against the position of the knot.


