

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 6 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  7200/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  3 (8/90)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  1 of 6

SUBJECT:  CORING

1.    GENERAL

1.1    The barrel type used by BP varies. Though the general configurations are all similar it is essential the
         Drilling Supervisor ensures he has the manufacturers hand book available for reference.

2.    CORING CONSIDERATIONS AND PRE-CORE OPERATIONS

2.1    There are occasions when the coring penetration rate is higher than the drilling rate, however, this is
        rare.  Coring operations will only proceed when, in the opinion of the BP Drilling Supervisor, the hole
        conditions are suitable. Hole conditions are all important since the core barrel will:

        a)  Normally penetrate slower than drilling.

        b)  Be of large diameter relative to the hole size.

        c)  Only allow a circulation rate often less than that used when drilling, especially when rat hole coring.
            Typical circulation rates used for normally consolidated formations are:

          12 1/4” hole         +/- 550 gpm
          8 1/2” hole           +/- 300 gpm
            6” hole               +/- 150 gpm

             Circulation rates for unconsolidated formations are reduced to minimise core washing:

          12 1/4” hole       260 - 300 gpm
          8 1/2” hole        150 - 200 gpm

         Note:
             Ifthereservoirispronetowashingout,restrictedcirculationratesmayberequired.

        d)  Be easier to plug with LCM.

        e)  Have a corehead that is easily damaged with:

                   i)   Junk.
                     ii)  Having to ream undergauge sections of hole.

         Note:
          Extremecaremustbetakenwhentrippingwithacorebarrel.

2.2    With a reduced penetration rate there are four main areas of concern:

        a)  Casing Wear: in deviated wells the effective side loads should be calculated in order to optimise
              drillpipe protector placement.  If side loads are a problem, consider the possible use of a motor for
             coring.

          Check the DP hard facing. Increase the number of casing protectors, especially at any dog legs or
           through a build-up section.

        b)  Differential Sticking: as the DC assembly may be relatively stationary the risk of differential
             sticking is increased. The length of DC’s run should be minimised and stabilisers installed across
          any exposed sands.

        c)  A Key Seat may be created. When pulling the barrel ensure that the driller minimises overpulls
          and open hole pulling speeds.

2.3    Ensure that prior to pulling out of the hole to run the core barrel, the mud is conditioned. Mud cake
       thickness and water loss levels should be minimised.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 2 از 6 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  7200/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  3 (8/90)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  2 of 6

SUBJECT:  CORING

      Note the type of solids/cuttings coming from the hole, if cavings are present in the returns, action will
      have to be taken to cure the caving formation BEFORE the last bit is pulled.   If the string overpulls
      when pulling the last bit, go back to bottom: check trip until hole is clean.

2.4    With full hole cores, the reduction of circulating rate will normally not be a problem as the reduction in
        flowrate is generally balanced by the reduction in volume of cuttings generated. However, where a rat
       hole core, i.e. 8 1/2” in a 12 1/4” hole, is being taken ensure the mud properties are capable of
       adequate hole cleaning at the reduced circulation rate.  If a caving or sloughing hole problem exists, the
       coring operation may have to be aborted or the core barrel size reviewed at the planning stage: ensure
      a hole size corehead and large barrel is used.

2.5    Ensure losses are fully cured before any coring operation is undertaken.  If losses develop whilst coring,
       stop immediately.  Prior to mixing LCM pills be fully aware of the additional restrictions within a core
        barrel.  Consideration should be given to installing a circulating sub in the coring assembly as
       contingency against well control problems. Opening ball diameters to be checked.

2.6     a)  Where the coring depth is known approximately, a junk sub should be considered for the last bit
           run in the hole. A DP wiper rubber must be used on the bit trip out of the hole. Also use the DP
           wiper rubber on the trip in the hole with the core barrel. The wiper rubber is intended to prevent
            junk falling down the hole.

          Review the previous bit runs to see if broken teeth indicate possible junk in hole or if inserts have
          been lost.

                   If this is the case consider making a separate trip with a hard bit and junk sub and clean up the
           bottom of the hole.

         Whenever the junk sub run is made, ensure that prior to running the core barrel the junk recovered
               is checked.  Dependent upon recovery  it may be necessary to make an additional junk sub run
             prior to coring.

        b)  Check the last bit prior to coring for gauge size. This is important for:

                   i)    Preventing damage to full gauge core heads when running back in the hole.

                     ii)   Ensuring the stabilised assembly does not get stuck whilst running in, or give torque problems
             when coring.

         Whenever reaming is undertaken with a corehead and barrel, always maximise the circulation rate
          and minimise rotary RPM and WOB to prevent gauge diamonds being damaged.  For anything
            other than minimal resistance when reaming, pull the core barrel and check trip the hole.

2.7    Ensure the drill string and DC assembly is drifted, at least to the TOTCO ring.  Retrieving the TOTCO
       instrument at the casing shoe on the trip out of the hole will act as a good drift run.

2.8    Check:

        a)  Fishing tools are available for all ODs and IDs.

        b)  The core barrel make-up torques, they are generally of a low value. (Use a chain tong for the initial
          make-up of threaded connections on the core barrel.)

        c)  The bearing assembly.

        d)  The inner barrel condition, i.e.  it is straight and has minimal corrosion. The inner barrel
           connections should be made up with a chain tong.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 3 از 6 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  7200/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  3 (8/90)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  3 of 6

SUBJECT:  CORING

         Note:
       When fibreglass inner barrels are being used, ensure that the ID is slick where the tube is bonded
         tothecoupling. Upsetsarenotacceptable.

        e)  The inner barrel space out distance is correct.

           f)  The core head condition:

          Water ways clear and diamonds unburnt.
         The correct bit breaker is available, and fits.

        g)  The barrel stabilisers are the correct gauge.

        h)  The ball seat condition and ball size.

            i)  The safety joint is clean and properly lubricated.  All “O” rings should be replaced  if not in good
             condition.

2.9    Always trip with a wiper rubber on the string. Ensure  it is of large enough diameter that  it cannot be
        carried through the bell nipple and BOP when RIH.

      Ensure the rubber is removed prior to reaming or coring.

2.10   Stabilisation at and above the barrel is of the utmost importance.   If the barrel design has no top
         stabiliser install a string stabiliser immediately above. Run stabilisers a minimum of 9m and 30m in the
     DCs above the barrel’s top stabiliser. This will help minimise the risk of differential sticking.

        a)  For an 8 1/2” rat hole core with 9m barrel in 12 1/4” hole:

          Core Head - Barrel Stab - Barrel - Barrel Stab - Safety Stab - 12 1/4” String Stab - 1 x 8” DC -
          12 1/4” ST Stab - 2 x 8” DC - 12 1/4” Stab.

         Add 8 1/2” Stabs and 6 1/2” DC as the rat hole deepens.

        b)  For 8 1/2” core in 8 1/2” hole:

          Core Head - Barrel Stab - Barrel - Barrel/String Stab - 1 x 6 1/2” DC - 8 1/2” Stab - 2 x 6 1/2” DC -
          8 1/2” Stab.

      Note:
      Consideration should be given to running a circulating sub directly above the core barrel as a
       contingencyifpackingoffoccurs. Ensurethatthecorebarrelballcanpassthroughthecirculatingsub.

2.11   Always minimise the DC assembly length for the WOB required by the core head. Replace DC with
    HWDP where possible in 12 1/4” and 8 1/2” holes.

2.12   Always run jars in the assembly. Ensure that the core barrel ball, or dart  if a rubber sleeve barrel is
       being used, passes through the jar.

2.13  Where a rubber sleeve core barrel is being used, check the assembly immediately above the barrel has
      a bore large enough to accept the rise of the inner barrel.

2.14  Run in the open hole slowly and ensure the driller watches for hole resistance.

2.15   Check the space out of the string is such that when on bottom the maximum kelly length is above the
        rotary, thereby ensuring the maximum continuous coring prior to making a connection. Ensure that pup
         joints will not be across the BOP stack during coring operations.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 4 از 6 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  7200/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  3 (8/90)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  4 of 6

SUBJECT:  CORING

3.    UNCONSOLIDATED CORING

        1.  The coring operation must be planned to achieve the maximum possible core recovery.  With
           unconsolidated sand and fractured limestone, there are additional problems with recovery in
            addition to core jamming. The core may be washed out by circulation or be lost on the trip out of
            the hole.

          Equipment used to improve core recovery include:

            a)   Fibreglass inner barrels. These barrels are cut into metre long sections and capped without
                 extrusion of the core. Fibreglass has a lower coefficient of friction than steel and should allow
                 easier core entry.

             The fibreglass quality should be checked prior to make-up of the inner barrel. Check the OD
                  of the barrel as undersized fibreglass has been known to collapse. Check that the IDs of the
                couplingsare flush with the ID of the fibreglass as small upsets may cause jamming. Check
                 the fibreglass for evidence of fraying.

           On recovery of the core at surface, each section of fibreglass should be removed from the drill
                    floor in a rigid cradle. Every effort must be taken to move the core without bending it.

             The saw to cut the fibreglass will be provided by the coring company. Ensure that adequate
                 safety equipment is provided.

            b)  A variety of catcher assemblies are available:

                            i)    Spring type.
                              ii)    Slip and dog type.
                               iii)   Gravity actuated flapper type.

             The choice will depend on the expected degree of consolidation of the sand combined with
               area experience.

             c)   Face discharge coreheads which reduce the possibility of the core being washed away at the
               corehead. The use of extended pilot shoes reduces the area of core subject to washing out
                  inside the corehead.

            d)   Frozen cores.

        2.  Rathole coring of unconsolidated sand should be avoided as the increased barrel instability (at
             least on the first core) can lead to loss of recovery. As the coring rate is expected to be high, there
               is normally no reason to rathole core.

4.    CORING OPERATIONS

        1.  Make up the coring assembly and RIH slowly. Beware of hole resistance.

        2.  Wash down the last 10 - 15m to bottom. Tag the bottom of the hole gently with high circulation
             rate.

         Note:
         EnsureDrillingChartRecorderisengagedandworking.

        3.  Wash the bottom of the hole without rotating and at a high circulation rate. Record the drags in the
            hole.

        4.  When circulation is complete (min. 1/2 hour) pull back to install the ball.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 5 از 6 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  7200/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  3 (8/90)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  5 of 6

SUBJECT:  CORING

                   If required, pump a small heavy pill into the string to prevent back flow. Back flow makes it difficult
             to confirm the ball has actually gone into the string.

        5.   Re-install the kelly, pump slowly, run in and gently tag the bottom of the hole. Pick up a minimum
            distance off bottom.

            Whilst waiting for the ball to reach the seat:

            a)  Check circulation rate.
            b)  Check circulation pressure.
             c)   Check the probable pressure increase when the ball seats.

             Prior to the ball seating slow down the pump.

        6.  When the ball seats:

            a)   Start the rotary, record the off bottom pressure. Take SCR’s.

            b)  Tag bottom and add the recommended starting weight.

             c)   Continue with this weight.

                            i)   With a hole size corehead until at least one foot is cored.

                              ii)  With a rat hole core until at least half the first of the barrel’s stabilisers is in the cored
                      hole.

            d)  Add weight and RPM up to:

                            i)  The maximum recommended for the corehead.
                      or
                              ii)  When the penetration rate ceases to increase.

            e)   Continue with constant weight on bit, RPM, and circulation rate. Constantly record the pump
                pressure and rotary torque. Watch carefully for any indication of rough drilling or drill string
                harmonics. Attempt throughout to ensure smooth rotation and addition of weight.

        7.  Constant pump output is very important, a pump pressure change should be noticed immediately.

        Common problems when coring:

            a)   Pressure increase which may be caused by:

                  1.  Plugging of the barrel. Stop rotating, lift off bottom and compare pressure with the initially
                    recorded off bottom pressure. The barrel must be pulled out of the hole.

                  2.  “O” ringing of the corehead, or plugging of the water passages.  This will normally be
                  accompanied by a decrease in penetration rate.  If the situation does not quickly revert to
                    normal, the core head will be seriously damaged.

                  3.  Change of formation.

            b)   Core Jamming:

                This will normally give a decrease in pump pressure and penetration rate, with a change in
                torque readings. The barrel will have to be pulled.

        8.  When making a connection or pulling off bottom, stop rotation and circulation and pick up slowly.
        On occasions, overpull will be seen as the core catcher grips the core.  Pull to a maximum of


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 6 از 6 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  7200/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  3 (8/90)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  6 of 6

SUBJECT:  CORING

           20,000 lbs overpull, after allowing for drags.   If the core fails to break, start circulating up to the
         maximum used while coring and hold the overpull until the core breaks.

           Pick up 3m then lower to within 0.5m off bottom. Resistance may indicate the core has been left in
            the hole.

           Pick up and make the connection or POH.

         Note:
       Do not use the rotary for the connection, but back out the kelly. After a connection, when coring is
         to resume, tag bottom gently. Without rotating, add weight to the core head to approximately 50%
           greater than the coring weight. This will release the core from the catcher. Pull back to a light
           coring weight, start the pump and begin rotating slowly. Do not use the full coring weight until at
           least6”hasbeencored. Continuecoring.

        9.   Circulate bottoms up.

         Note:
             If cutting an unconsolidated core, this should be avoided. Circulate bottoms up prior to cutting the
           core.

       10. POH.

         Note:
       Do not rotate and attempt at all times to minimise jarring or shock loads. Instruct the Driller to set
         theslipscarefully.

       11. Remove the core head, install the protector and then recover the core from the inner barrel.

       12.  If the barrel is to be re-used, repeat all checks.   If  it is to be laid down, ensure all stabiliser
           connections are broken and the barrel is flushed through in the Vee Door.

        AT ALL TIMES when handling a core barrel, use the DC clamp.

       13. When rat hole coring, do not have more than 40m of rat hole.

                i.e. Clean out with full gauge bit before proceeding with cutting the next core.

       14. During coring operations involving the possible presence of H2S, only essential personnel should
          be on the drill floor wearing BA apparatus. The BA apparatus must be worn until such time that
          gas testing indicates that the area can be declared safe.


