

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 15 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  7300/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (11/89)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  1 of 15

SUBJECT: MUD LOGGING SERVICES

1.    REPORTING

1.1    The logger reports to the Drilling Representative when he arrives on the rig and during rig up of unit.

       During operation, the logger must report all pit gains/losses, significant gas peaks and drill breaks to
         driller and operator representative.  Geological information is reported to geologist, or the drilling
       supervisor in his absence. Charts in the unit should be properly annotated for times and events.

1.2    Equipment Monitoring and Unit Duties

1.2.1  The logging unit is an overpressured, skid mounted unit certified to the certifying authority and DOE
       requirements.

1.2.2  The external sensors are explosion proof and the unit equipment is protected by an intrinsically safe
        barrier system.

1.2.3  The unit is manned 24 hours a day or when required and the instruments should be monitored
        continuously.

1.2.4  Continuous Total Gas Detector records continuously on a strip chart and computer. The gas level
      alarm should be set to sound for significant gas increases and these should be reported. The
       chromatograph provides gas sample information only. Of paramount importance is H2S detection, also
        with operator-set alarms.

1.2.5 ROP Recorder is monitored continuously on a chart/computer for drill breaks, in addition to ROP data
         for mud log. Breaks should be reported in accordance with BP procedure for flow checks.

1.2.6 Pump Stroke Counter and Totaliser is used for calculated sample up times. The logger may also be
        told to count strokes during particular rig operations, e.g. displacing cement.  Zeroing of cumulative
       strokes should precede any such operation.

1.2.7 Mud Pit Level Indicator. The active pit level must be monitored continuously by the logger and any
      changes reported.  All pits in the system are monitored and printouts/computer records of total pits and
        active pits are kept. The audible alarm must be set within high and low limits acceptable to BP Drilling
       Representative.

1.2.8   Monitoring total gas, ROP and mud level are important for rig safety.

      The loggers primary job function is to collect and process samples, monitor the well for safety and
       acquire good quality data.  Equally important is that alarms provided are set correctly and
       acknowledged.  Failure to monitor pit gains/losses, drill breaks, or significant gas peaks can endanger
       the rig and crew. Failure to monitor other instruments can result in incorrect geological or drilling data.
      The consequence of lack of communication between logger, mud engineer or rig crew can be risk to the
       operation and loss of credibility in the mud logging service.

1.2.9    It is customary for any service company representative to discuss general aspects of the operation from
       time to time and should be readily available to do this.

1.3    Rig Up

1.3.1  The mud logging service will be considered ready when:

            i)    All equipment is rigged up, checked and calibrated.

             ii)   Unit organised and ready for sample catching, bags are marked and log sheets prepared.

              iii)  Unit properly stocked with expendable supplies and spares.

          iv)  The sensor hook-up verification sheet has been signed by the rig representative.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 2 از 15 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  7300/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (11/89)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  2 of 15

SUBJECT: MUD LOGGING SERVICES

1.3.2  The service will be considered complete when:

            i)  The well is finished and plugs are set.

             ii)  The logs are completed and handed to operator.

              iii)   All data including worksheets, print-outs and data tapes have been handed to operator. Data tape
           format should be of the format described in the BP Technical Specification for mud logging
            services.

          iv)   All equipment has been rigged down and packed for dispatch.

2.    CUTTINGS PROCESSING

2.1    Collection

      The sample is collected from a board in front of the shakers.

      The board is to be cleared after each sample. The sample is to be taken from the full width of the
       shakers so as to be representative of the interval. Be aware of finer particles from the formation not
       being screened out by the shakers, thus missing the sampling.  In these cases, the desilter and
       desander should be sampled for visual examination only.

2.2   Washing

     Washed samples should be prepared in the unit washed with diesel (base oil  if OBM) followed by
        detergent, potable or drill water.

      Removal of clay smear is important for cuttings description but may not be possible in soft clay
        formation.

      Samples are usually worked from coarse collecting sieve into fine sieve.

2.3    Description

        Lithologic analysis of cuttings is performed on washed sample in watch glass with the aid of a
       microscope and fluoroscopic analysis is carried out with the aid of solvents to detect hydrocarbons.

2.4    Drying and Logging

      Washed samples are dried in drying oven and packed in envelopes. Wet unworked samples are put
        into cloth bags directly at shakers. Samples for geochemical analysis are packed in barrier (SEET) foil
      bags with added bacteriocide (not aluminium tins).

2.5   The contractors personnel are responsible for ensuring samples are caught and packed at correct
        intervals and despatched to shore.

3.    INFORMATION REGARDING LIMITATIONS, ACCURACY AND TOLERANCES OF EQUIPMENT
     SYSTEMS AND PROCEDURES - BASIC MUD LOGGING

3.1   The Unit Equipment

3.1.1  Standard Equipment:     Computerised monitoring/acquisition of:

                                  Total gas
                            Chromatograph C1 - C5
                     ROP


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 3 از 15 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  7300/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (11/89)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  3 of 15

SUBJECT: MUD LOGGING SERVICES

                           Time on/off bottom
                       Pump rate
                                Flowrate
                                       Pit volumes
                          H2S
                       Mud weight in and out
                       Mud temperature in and out
                               Rotary torque
                              Standpipe pressure
                               Rotary speed
                          Hook load and weight on bit
                          Cement unit pump rate and pressure

      These data will be recorded on electronic media, against both depth and time.

3.1.2  A monitor may be installed in the operator’s office to display and record any of these parameters versus
       depth and/or time.

3.2    Standard Equipment

3.2.1   Total Gas

      The gas sample is sucked into the unit from a gas trap behind the shakers by a vacuum pump in the
         unit. An air driven agitator in the gas trap helps liberate gas from the mud. The sample is distributed to
       the different instruments from behind the mud panel in the logging unit.

       INSTRUMENTS:   Flame ionisation (FID) total gas detector.

       LOCATION:      Behind main panel in unit. Control valves, instrument attenuation and chart recorder is
                   on main panel.

       OPERATION:    The ditch gas sample is brought to the instrument continuously. The sample is ionised
                            in a flame chamber and the charge measured by electrodes. The signal is recorded on
                   a chart and computer. The gas detector is calibrated by injecting a sample of known
                       concentration and calculating chart division per concentration. Zero is to air.

        LIMITATIONS:    The gas sample is mixed with air from the trap and the concentration of gas reaching
                       the instrument depends on the positioning and efficiency of the trap. The position of
                       the “gas trap” in the returning mud should be checked twice per hour when circulating.
                   The detector is an accurate piece of equipment which must be calibrated at least once
                   a week. The gas trap should be cleaned daily. FID is most accurate for 0 - 5% gas
                        concentration.

3.2.2  Chromatograph

       INSTRUMENT:    FID chromatograph.

       LOCATION:       In main panel, complete with attenuation and strip chart, signal link to computer and
                          integrator.

       OPERATION:    Gas sample brought to instrument by vacuum pump. Sample is regularly automatically
                         injected and carried through selective columns which separates the gas components
                   C1-C5, allowing them to be sampled individually. The result is recorded on a
                   chromatogramme and analysed on an automatic, programmable on-line integrator.
                   The chromatograph is calibrated by injecting a sample of known proportions of C1-C5
                   and converting chart divisions/integrator response to PPM of individual gases from
                   methane equivalent concentrations measured.

        LIMITATIONS:    The chromatograph is limited by the quality of the sample, as described for total gas.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 4 از 15 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  7300/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (11/89)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  4 of 15

SUBJECT: MUD LOGGING SERVICES

3.2.3  ROP

       INSTRUMENT:     Hydrostatic pressure kelly height meter, geolograph wire or drawworks sensors. The
                             latter is favoured, for safety of use and ease of maintenance.

       LOCATION:     The hydrostatic transducer is fixed to the kelly (top drive) hose and an oil or water line
                              is taken from transducer to a reservoir in the derrick. The movement of the kelly (top
                          drive) changes hydrostatic in the line which is converted to an electrical signal by the
                       transducer.  Alternatively an electromechanical transducer detects rotation of the
                    drawworks drum or a geolograph wire monitors the position of the travelling blocks. A
                         signal cable leads from whichever transducer to the unit.

       OPERATION:    The signal is sent to the computer, and ROP calculated, displayed and stored.
                       Correction for drill string elasticity is required. A chart display should be provided of
                          kelly/top-drive motion.

        LIMITATIONS:    The hydrostatic hose is vulnerable to damage and restriction.   If rigged up and
                         calibrated properly, the system is accurate. The hydrostatic kelly height meter and the
                      geolograph are restricted to while-drilling monitoring only if connected to the kelly (less
                          restrictive with top drive hose), whilst the drawworks transducer can additionally
                    monitor tripping. The latter is therefore favoured. An independent heave-
                     compensation system should be provided on floating rigs.

3.2.4  Pump Strokes Indicator

       INSTRUMENT:    Dual pump counter.

       LOCATION:    SPM digital readout, strip chart and computer calibrated in gpm and total stroke
                      counters per pump on panel computer. Pick-up units are mounted on each pump.

       OPERATION:    The pick-up units are microswitches actuated by an arm mounted so that the switch
                   opens for each pump stroke. The signal is converted to SPM in the computer.
                        Alternatively, proximity switches are used, detecting pump motion by induction
                     methods. A flowmeter measures mud flow out of hole.

        LIMITATIONS:    The microswitches can become jammed, the pick-up arms misaligned and either miss
                       strokes or double the count.   If set up and maintained properly, the system is reliable
                   and accurate.  If mounted internally in the pump, proximity switches are very accurate.

3.2.5   Pit Volume Totaliser

       LOCATION:       In main panel. Sensors are located over each pit in mud system.

       OPERATION:    The pit level is sensed by sonic pulses bouncing off the mud level, or a float with
                    magnets on a pole which trips reed switches as it passes. The signal is sent to the unit
                   and recorded on a strip chart and computer.

                       Non-linear calibrations (multi-stage) may be required for complex pits.

        LIMITATIONS:    The instrument is subject to interference if the dish is dirty and the sensor is vulnerable
                          to the corrosive atmosphere above a mud pit. Steam from the pits can cause severe
                         signal scatter.  If sensors are kept clean and pits are not too steamy, the system is very
                        accurate.

3.2.6  H2S Detector
       INSTRUMENT:     Infra-red H2S detector or electronic (platinum electrode).
       LOCATION:       Either in panel or separate instrument on bench, linked to the computer.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 5 از 15 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  7300/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (11/89)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  5 of 15

SUBJECT: MUD LOGGING SERVICES

       OPERATION:     Continuous ditch gas sample from vacuum system. H2S will blacken a white sensitive
                       ribbon and a light detector will give signal to alarm. The instrument can be calibrated
                    by inserting a blank in front of ribbon. The alternative method measures the resistance
                          of a platinum electrode which varies in the presence of H2S.
        LIMITATION:     The H2S detector is limited by the quality of the gas sample. The ribbon should be
                          periodically checked to ensure sensitivity at intervals of one week maximum, and each
                      sensor calibrated once per week with test cylinders of H2S.
3.2.7  Mud Weight In and Out

       LOCATION:       In main panel with computer storage and chart readout. Sensors are located in ditch
                      behind shakers and in active pit.

       OPERATION:    The sensors are probes which measure differential pressure across a diaphragm
                       against a reference air pressure.

                       This equipment is calibrated by zeroing in air and spanning to a known fluid density,
                        e.g. freshwater.  Alternatively, a heavy ball hangs in the mud and its buoyancy
                   measured (strain gauge), or gamma ray absorption of the mud is monitored.

        LIMITATION:     The diaphragm of the differential pressure sensor must be located in moving mud so
                    as not to become clogged with cuttings.   If set up and calibrated correctly,  it can be
                               fairly accurate but must be cleaned regularly.

3.2.8  Rotary Torque

       LOCATION:        Digital storage and strip chart on panel.  Current detector clamped to power cable to
                         rotary drive (Hall effect).

       OPERATION:     Sensor detects current drawn by rotary table/top drive and converts it to signal which is
                       displayed in unit. The measured torque in amps must be converted to a force unit for
                        display and storage (i.e. k ft lbs or KNM).

        LIMITATION:     None, provided clamp securely fixed.

3.2.9  Standpipe Pressure

       LOCATION:        Digital storage and strip chart on panel. Pressure transducer on standpipe manifold.

       OPERATION:    Mud pressure operates a diaphragm in a housing. The transducer converts pressure
                          to signal which is sent to unit. The instrument is calibrated using a dead-weight tester.

        LIMITATION:      This instrument is rugged and reliable and needs little attention.

       CALIBRATION:    Should be performed with a deadweight tester, once per well.

3.2.10 Rotary Speed

       LOCATION:        Digital storage and chart on panel. Sensor under rotary table. Alternatively a signal is
                      taken from the top drive control unit.

       OPERATION:    A proximity device senses a mass fixed to rotary drive (induction). The signal is sent to
                           unit and displayed.

        LIMITATION:     The rotary table sensor is subjected to a lot of vibration but  if mounted correctly is
                           reliable and accurate.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 6 از 15 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  7300/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (11/89)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  6 of 15

SUBJECT: MUD LOGGING SERVICES

3.2.11 Hookload/Weight on Bit

       LOCATION:        Digital storage and panel display with hookload/WOB electro switch plus strip chart
                        recorder. Transducer near deadline anchor with hydraulic line “Tee” into rig, hydraulic
                            line to load cell, or clamp-line tensiometer type on drill line. Clamp-line tensiometer is
                       the favoured sensor type, being independent of rig equipment.

       OPERATION:      Alternatively, hydraulic pressure from a load cell is converted to signal in transducer.
                       Signal is displayed in unit. WOB is calculated from string weight (input) minus last
                         free-rotating hookload.  This value of current string weight must be checked and
                     updated regularly (once per single/stand).

        LIMITATION:     The hydraulic system is dependent on the rig Martin Decker system.  Very few
                     problems occur so long as hydraulic system does not leak. The independent clamp-
                           line tensiometer should be installed wherever possible.  This sensor may require
                     removal (simple) during slip and cut operations.

4.    ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FOR PRESSURE DETECTOR SERVICES

4.1     In additon to the basic mud logging service, provision may be made in the work order for data/pressure
       engineering services.

      The Pressure Detection Engineer (PDE) provides an estimate of formation pressure with the aid of
         offline computer programmes. A pressure log will be prepared as specified in Section 6.

4.2    The Pressure Detection Engineer will report to the operator’s representative on arrival at the wellsite.

4.3    The pressure detection service will be considered ready when:

            i)   Computer and additional equipment is rigged up and checked out.
             ii)  When the pressure detection engineer is at the wellsite.

4.4    During the course of his duties the PDE will report the following to the operator’s representative:

            i)  Any change in “d” exponent, shale density, shale factor, flowline temperature or gas trends which
           could indicate overpressure.

             ii)  Any change in drilling parameters which could be significant in terms of hole condition, e.g. torque
           change.

              iii)   Pit gains or losses, drill breaks, significant gas peaks, hole swabbing on trips.

        In addition, the PDE will make a daily written report of the parameters monitored, plus present any print-
       outs from the offline programmes requested by the operator’s representative.

      The PDE will keep the operator up-to-date on pore pressure and fracture pressure estimates.

4.5    Pore Pressure Evaluation Methods: Procedures, Limitations and Accuracy

4.5.1   “d” Exponent

       Calculation and use of “d” exponent is a method of normalising penetration rate so as to show up
      changes in formation compaction.  “d” exponent is calculated at 5m intervals using an equation of the
        type:


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 7 از 15 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  7300/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (11/89)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  7 of 15

SUBJECT: MUD LOGGING SERVICES

           R           R  = ROP in FT/HR

               log 60 N         N  = RPM
      d =
              log 12 W       W  = WOB in KLBS

             106D          D  =  Hole Size in Inches

      The exponent is usually corrected for mud weight, giving dxc:

       dxc =  d. Weq         Weq  =  Normal pressure grad.
             ECD        ECD  =   Effective circulation density

       dxc is plotted on semilog paper and a normal trend is established in the shallower formations, usually
        clays. Deviation from the normal trend in shales can indicate overpressure and this is calculated.

      Pore Pressure  =  Normal Gradient   x     dxc NORM
         lbs/gall                 lbs/gall               dxc OBSERVED

      An overlay is constructed for different mud weights using the formula above.

        Different companies use variations of the basic formula, correcting for other variables, e.g. bit wear - for
       exact formula in use, refer to service company.

        Limitations

      The “d” exponent only holds good for clean shale (mudstone) formations.  In other types,  it is very
        variable and trends are difficult to spot.

      The Jordan and Shirley method, illustrated above, was derived in the Gulf Coast so experience in the
        operator’s area is advisable.  Formation changes, e.g. increase in silt content, can shift the trend to
       resemble overpressure.

      Changes in certain conditions, e.g. a new bit, bit wear, can produce shifts in the trend which must be
       recognised.

      Use of a turbine produces a wide range of trends since WOB is not necessarily held constant, therefore
       dxc evaluation during turbine runs is not a valuable overpressure indicator.

        Interpretation of “d” exponent trends when drilling with PDC bits is unreliable due to bit cutter effects
      and bit wear. A bit torque-based estimate of formation drillability is preferred with PDC bits.

       Accuracy

        Individual readings may be very accurate. Trend interpretation depends on experience and judgement
        of the engineer. Dxc is a useful tool only  if drilling through thick uniform shale sections with
       conventional rotary methods.

4.5.2  Shale Density

       Clean shale cuttings are taken from each sample and air dried on paper towels. The cuttings density is
      measured either with a mud balance or in a variable density column.  Variable density fluid columns
     may require toxic fluids and thus handling restrictions should be referred to.

        a)  Mud Balance

         The dried cuttings fill a mud balance until it reads 8.33 and fresh water is added until the cuttings
           are completely covered. The cap is put on the balance and the density is read. This is D1.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 8 از 15 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  7300/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (11/89)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  8 of 15

SUBJECT: MUD LOGGING SERVICES

           Using the formula:       S.G.  =     8.33
                                             16.66 - D1
            the specific gravity of the cuttings is determined.

            Limitations

            Individual cuttings are not selected so there is a chance of formation contamination including
            cavings. This method will produce a trend which can be valuable.

          Accuracy

           This method is not accurate and wide variations can be seen. but the trend is useful and is a good
             alternative to a density column.

        b)  Variable Density Column

           Dried cuttings are placed in a graduated glass column, filled with a mixture of liquids having a
            variable density.

         The column is calibrated by placing reference beads of known density in the column and plotting
              their positions on a chart.

            Limitations

         The cuttings can either float if too wet or sink if too dry and absorb the fluid. The chemicals used to
            create the variable density column are hazardous.

          Accuracy

           Results from the column can be fairly accurate although agitation of the apparatus on an offshore
               rig can upset the calibration and it is very difficult to get a linear change in density when making up
            the column.

4.5.3  Shale Factor

       Shale factor is also known as the Methylene Blue Test (MBT).  Generally, as shales compact with
       depth, the proportion of illite clay minerals increase relative to montmorillonite.  In medium depth
        formations, a higher proportion of montmorillonite is indicative of overpressure.

      The percentage of montmorillonite in the shale cuttings is determined by the MBT where the cation
      exchange capacity of the sample can be measured. This increases with montmorillonite content.

        Limitations

      The proportions of montmorillonite may change from formation to formation, so results can be
       misleading. However, as in all pore pressure determination methods, trends not individual results are
         significant. While the MBT may not prove much in itself, it is a useful tool to back up other information
      and present a fuller picture of formation trends.

       Accuracy

      The method is fairly accurate, the interpretation is not.

4.5.4  Mud Temperature

      Abnormally pressured formations have high geothermal gradients since such formations act as
        insulators.  Platinum resistance probes are mounted to measure mud flow in and out. Advanced
       equipment is self-calibrating, alternatively the equipment is zeroed in ice and calibrated to boiling water.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 9 از 15 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  7300/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (11/89)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  9 of 15

SUBJECT: MUD LOGGING SERVICES

        Limitations

      Measurement of flowline temperature can be a useful diagnostic tool, but in the offshore environment
       the temperature trend is greatly distrubed by the cooling effect of the sea.

     Mud transfer to active pit and water addition can cool the mud system, making the value of temperature
       readings very doubtful.

      The probes can become clogged with mud but, if kept clean, work well and are very accurate.

       Accuracy

      The temperature probes are accurate, the method of overpressure detection is not.

4.5.5  Gas Readings

      The PDE pays particular attention to the total gas readings.

      BACKGROUND GAS: is the usual gas level from the drilled formation cuttings. Any increase without
        significant increase in ROP indicates the well is close to balance.

       CONNECTION GAS: is a small amount of gas generated on bottom during a connection.  It could indicate
      swabbing as well close to balance.

       TRIP GAS: is an accumulation of gas circulated up from bottom after a trip.  It may be swabbed gas or,
      as above, the well is close to balance.

        Limitations

         Drilling behaviour, e.g. reaming, can increase the cuttings/cavings in the mud. Gas curves are open to
        interpretation but generally an increase in background trip and connection gases are an indication of
       near balance.

4.5.6  Mud Weight

     Mud weight out is monitored and reductions due to gas cutting noted.  Generally, gas cutting is not
        serious, since most expansion occurs in the top few hundred feet of the well thus having little effect on
       the total hydrostatic. Reduction in mud weight due to formation water influx should be taken seriously
      by the PDE and observations should be reported to the operators representative and checked for
         validity with the mud engineer.

4.6    Offline Programmes

      Overpressure information is determined with the aid of an overpressure evaluation suite of
      programmes.

4.6.1  OVERBURDEN GRADIENT DETERMINATION is used in the calculation of fracture gradient.  This requires
      knowledge of formation bulk density or data from the sonic log.

4.6.2  ADVANCED OVERPRESSURE ANALYSIS utilises dxc and estimates overburden stress gradient, fracture
        gradient, porosity, matrix stress, and pore pressure.

4.6.3  FLOWLINE TEMPERATURE ANALYSIS including end to end plot. See limitations in foregoing section on mud
       temperature.

4.6.4   Wireline Plotting Suite and Determination of Clay Porosity

      These programmes plot drilling and wireline parameters or density sonic cross plot for clay porosity.
       This is performed rarely by mud logging companies.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 10 از 15 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  7300/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (11/89)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  10 of 15

SUBJECT: MUD LOGGING SERVICES

4.7   Summary - Pore Pressure Evaluation, Limitations and Accuracy

       Formation pore pressures are estimated by looking at all the evidence from data gathered. Since much
        of this evidence is based on deviations from established trends for each piece of data, the quality of the
        service depends on the skill and experience of the engineer.

     He will use his plots, knowledge of the area, and observation of well behaviour (e.g. condition of
        cuttings at shakers) to estimate pore pressure.

       While dxc can give direct results, other methods only give an estimate of degree of overbalance. The
      system is open to interpretation and the operators representative should not rely solely on results from
       computer programmes.

      The system is not accurate but  if the job is conducted properly, recommendations for optimum
       overbalance can be provided.

5.    REPORTING

       Reporting procedures are outlined fully in the BP Technical Specification for Mud Logging Services.
     Two daily telexes are required.

5.1    The Daily Pressure Telex should contain the following information given at 10m (30 ft) intervals:

          Depth
                Drill Exponent
          Pore Pressure
        Mud Weight
        ECD
            Fracture Gradient
             Static + Dynamic Overbalance
            Total Gas
           Shale Density
            Flowline Temperature.

5.2    The Daily Geological Report should contain:

           Date, Well No., Day No., Depth Data, Rig Name, RTE
             Lithological Data
           Formation Tops (Provisional)
         Shows

6.    LOG FORMATS

      Three logs are to be compiled at the rigsite - the Formation Evaluation Log (FEL), the Pressure
       Evaluation Log (PEL) and the Drilling Evaluation Log (DEL).  Further details can be found in the BP
       Technical Specification for Mud Logging Services.

6.1   The Formation Evaluation Log

      The FEL is based upon the cutting register and is subdivided on a 1:500 depth scale, into:

       Track 1 :     Drillstring parameters, i.e. WOB RPM torque (WOB in klbs, torque in kftlbs).

       Track 2 :   Remarks, e.g. mud weight/ECD, surveys, shoe depths, cores, shows, etc.

       Track 3 :  ROP and bit data (bit type, size, jets, in/out depths, footage, hours, grade).


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 11 از 15 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  7300/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (11/89)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  11 of 15

SUBJECT: MUD LOGGING SERVICES

       Track 4 :    Depth, MD/TVD.

       Track 5 :    Cuttings percentage log including cement, junk, LCM, cavings, etc.

       Track 6 :    Symbolic lithological interpretation.

       Track 7 :   Percentage hydrocarbon gas in air, normalised for ROP/temperature.

       Track 8 :    Lithological description.

6.2   The Pressure Evaluation Log

      The PEL, again on a 1:500 depth scale, specifies:

       Track 1 :   Depth BRT/TVD etc., shoe depths, liner hangers.

       Track 2 :    Lithological interpretation completed after review of all data, i.e. logs, cores.

       Track 3 :   ROP.

       Track 4 :  D exponent, bulk density and shale factor if appropriate.

       Track 5 :   Pressure evaluation including calculated pore pressures and fracture gradients, mud
                    weights, LOT data, ECD, etc.

       Track 6 :   Gas, total methane equivalent from summation of chromatograph.

       Track 7 :    Variable - unspecified, e.g. flowline temperature, information from MWD (gamma ray) etc.

6.3   The Drilling Evaluation Log

      The DEL, again on a 1:500 depth scale, specifies:

       Track 1 :   Weight on bit (klbs), rotary speed at bit (rpm).

       Track 2 :   Rate of penetration (m/hr), corrected for drill string elasticity effects.

       Track 3 :    Interpreted lithology.

       Track 4 :    Surface torque, maximum surface torque (kft.lbs).

       Track 5 :   Depth BRT (m).

       Track 6 :    Standpipe pressure (psi), mud flow in (gpm).

       Track 7 :    Hydrostatic pressure, overbalance (dynamic) pressure (psi).

       Track 8 :    Left blank for BP-requested derived parameters.

       Track 9 :    Lithology descriptions, survey data, bit gradings, etc.

7.   MUD LOGGING END OF WELL REPORT

7.1    Contents

     A typewriter or word-processor must be available at the wellsite.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 12 از 15 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  7300/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (11/89)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  12 of 15

SUBJECT: MUD LOGGING SERVICES

      From the Base Mud Logging Service, the following information must be included in the End of Well
       Report:

          •  A description of services provided, including personnel listing.

          •  A full Well FEL (1 sepia only, plus 1 paper copy per report).

          •  A full Well DEL (1 sepia only, plus 1 paper copy per report).

          •  A full Well Numeric Hardcopy Printout.

          •  A sensor Hook-Up verification sheet.

          •  A sensor Calibration Record.

          •  Sensor History sheets.

          •  A report on metal returns as removed from the flowline magnet.

            If contracted to provide further services, the additional reports as specified within the relevant technical
        specification shall also be included.

     BP retains the right to alter the format and content of the required End of Well report at any time.

7.2    Delivery

     One provisional copy of the End of Well report, including provisional logs, is to be delivered to the
       appropriate BP geological co-ordinator, within fourteen days of the end of the well. The reports will then
      be checked and the contractor notified that the specified number of copies of the report should be
       forwarded, within seven days of notification. (The required number of copies should be specified by the
        local BP Operations Geologist). One copy of the approved report, including logs, should be forwarded
        direct to the BP Operations Geologist.

      The sepia drafting film employed on all logs is to have a minimum thickness of 0.030”.

         All data are to be regarded as confidential, including originals of graphic logs, work sheets and gas or
       other sensor charts.  All such information will,  if requested, be handed to BP Rig Geologist, or other
       personnel as defined by BP, at the completion of the well. The on-line chart recorder outpouts, and
      computer time-based data records for the complete well, are to be offered to the Senior Drilling
       Engineer at the end of the well.

8.    PROVISION OF DATA TAPE FOR POST-WELL ANALYSIS

        In general, the operation being conducted dictates the data monitoring and acquisition requirements.
      The current requirements are relatively simple. These consist of providing drilling performance data on
        tape, for the four operations listed below:

        a)   Drilling            (Operation Code = °D’)
        b)  Hole Opening      (Operation Code = °H’)
        c)  Underreaming     (Operation Code = °U’)
        d)  Coring             (Operation Code = °C’)

      These performance records are identical and consist of depth based data. Therefore assuming that the
     mud logging unit can allocate an operation code by manual or automatic means,  it is anticipated that
       there should be no problem obtaining these records.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 13 از 15 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  7300/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (11/89)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  13 of 15

SUBJECT: MUD LOGGING SERVICES

8.1    Parameters Required for Post Well Analysis

      The following parameters shall be recorded on a per unit depth increment basis for each of the four
        specified operations:

        1.   Depth.
        2.  BHA Run Number.
        3.   Operation Code.
        4.   Date.
        5.   Time.
        6.   Time on Bottom.
        7.   Time off Bottom.
        8.   Cumulative Rotating Hours on Bit.
        9.  Mud Flow In - calculated from pump performance.
       10.  Total SPM (to the well).
       11.  Surface Rotary Speed.
       12.  Free rotating off bottom string weight (Operator input).
       13.  Weight on Bit (Surface).
       14.  Average Rotary Torque (Applied).
       15.  Maximum Rotary Torque (Applied).
       16.  Standpipe Pressure.
       17.  Mud Weight In.

8.2    Definitions and Frequency of Recording

      Data records are required on per unit depth increment basis with:

        a)  Parameter 2 is the sequential number of the BHA run which completed the current depth
            increment.

        b)  Parameters 4 and 5 being recorded at the completion of the current depth increment.

        c)  Parameters 6 and 7 are the summation of times for the current depth increment.

        d)  Parameter 8 is the summation of rotating hours for that particular BHA run up until the end of the
            current depth increment.

        e)  Parameters 9 - 17 are derived statistically for each parameter over the current depth increment.

      Note:
   A record must exist for every unit depth increment even if no data has been recorded. It should include
      therelevantBHArunnumberandoperationcodealongwithsubstitutedstandarderrorcodes.

8.3    Units in which Data must be Presented

      These data shall be presented in the following engineering units:

      ParameterNo.   Description               Units

      1               Depth                         Unit of depth increment
      2            BHA Run Number
      3                 Operation Code
      4                Date                YYMMDD
      5               Time                HHMMSS
      6               Time on Bottom              Minutes
      7               Time off Bottom              Minutes
      8                Cumulative Rotating         Hours
      9             Mud Flow In - Calculated    GPM
      10                 Total SPM             SPM


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 14 از 15 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  7300/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (11/89)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  14 of 15

SUBJECT: MUD LOGGING SERVICES

      11                Surface Rotary Speed      RPM
      12                  String Weight                Klbs
      13               Weight on Bity               Klbs
      14              Average Rotary Torque         Kft.lbs
      15            Maximum Rotary Torque       Kft.lbs
      16               Standpipe Pressure            psi
      17            Mud Weight                     lbs/gal

8.4    Data Verification

      As most Driling engineering work is based on historic data, every effort shall be made to ensure that the
       performance records are as complete and accurate as possible.  This can only be achieved  if the
        following rules are enforced:

        1.  The Sensor Calibration Check programme, as specified in the Technical Specification for Mud
           Logging Services, shall be rigidly enforced.

        2.   All equipment or sensor failures shall be reported. The appropriate action shall be taken
            immediately.

        3.  The Performance records shall be checked for erroneous readings and missing values. These
          must be substituted with a standard error code, e.g. -999.25.

      Note:
        It is anticipated that erroneous or missing data values will most likely occur at the start or the end of bit
       runs.

8.5    Presentation of Digital Data

      The data specified within Section 8.1 should be provided on a magnetic tape which shall conform to the
       Logging Industry Standard (LIS) format. The tape density should be 800 or preferably 1600 bpi.

       Contractor must be capable of providing tapes ex-rig site within 4 working days of the data being
       requested, and should have the capability of editing tapes in the UK should the need arise.

      The tape should be forwarded to the BP Drilling Operations Group Senior Drilling Engineer.

      The following mnemonics should be used to define the data records:

        a)   Wellsite Information (Record Type 34)

         Parameter   Description            Mnemonic

          1             Well Name             WELL
          2             Operator              OPER
          3                  Drill Datum Height         OSET (wrt well ref pt.)

        b)  Data Records (Record Type 0)

         Parameter   Description             Mnemonic*

          1            Depth                DMEA
          2         BHA Run Number        BRUN
          3             Operation Code         OPCD
          4            Date                  DATE
          5           Time                    TIME
          6           Time on Bottom          TON
          7           Time off Bottom          TOF
          8             Cumulative Rotating Hours   BDTI


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 15 از 15 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  7300/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (11/89)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  15 of 15

SUBJECT: MUD LOGGING SERVICES

          9          Mud Flow In - Calculated     MFIA
          10             Total SPM             SPM
          11            Surface Rotary Speed      RPMA
          12             String Weight           STWT
          13           Weight on Bit          WOBA
          14           Average Rotary Torque     TQA
          15         Maximum Rotary Torque    TQX
          16           Standpipe Pressure        SPPA
          17         Mud Weight In            MDIA

         * As defined in the Data format specification (record type).


