

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 1 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  7400/GEN

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (11/89)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  1 of 1

SUBJECT:  ELECTRIC LOGGING OPERATIONS USING PRESSURE EQUIPMENT

SCHLUMBERGER THROUGH TUBING/PRODUCTION OPERATIONS WITH PRESSURE EQUIPMENT

1.    TESTING RISER

      The following procedure will be followed for testing Schlumberger “Grease Injection Lubricator”.

1.1    Assemble lubricator with cable and bridle but do NOT install tool or gun.

1.2      Fill up lubricator with water by pumping slowly through circulating head or bleed-off valve.

      Note:
    Donotusedieseloilforpressuretestsbecauseofthedangerofflashignition.

1.3    Energise the seal with grease.  If this is insufficient to hold pressure also energise the stuffing box.

1.4    Slowly pressure test the lubricator to the required value.

      Note:
      Pressuresover5000psirequirethespecial10,000psiriser/BOP.

2.    TESTING BOP’S

        Prior to rig up the Schlumberger BOP will be tested by inserting a 7/32” (or 3/16” depending on cable
        size) “I” shaped test rod between rams. The cable is not to be used for this purpose since pressure
       leaks occur through the armour.

3.    PICKING UP THE TOOL OR GUN

3.1     Install the gun in lubricator and tighten Bowen Union fully.

3.2       If the well is under pressure, leave about 1.5m between the top of the gun and the stuffing box, then
       manually pull on the cable until the tool or gun touches the stuffing box. This is to prevent the tool or
      gun becoming jammed when pressure comes onto the riser, and to avoid snapping the cable at the
       head.

3.3    Slowly pressure up the lubricator to the THP and inspect for leaks.

3.4    Ensure tool trap is closed.

3.5   Open the master gate. Then open the swab valve slowly.

3.6    While Schlumberger are in the tubing, ensure the Xmas tree and circulating head valves have a sign
        tied onto them to act as a warning against inadvertent cutting of the wire.

      Note:
        Iftheriserhastobeliftedorloweredtoinstalltoolorgun,therewillbeanerrorinthe“zero”oftwicethe
       distancemoved.

            If  it is essential to have no pressure leak when the BOP is closed on the cable, a note to this effect
       should be made in the programme.  In this case 2 BOP’s will be used in tandem and heavy grease
        injected between the two sets of rams to act as a sealant.


