

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 2 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  8200/JAK

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (9/90)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  1 of 2

SUBJECT:  JACKING PROCEDURES

1.    PREPARATIONS FOR ELEVATING THE UNIT

1.1    Main generators, electrical switchboards, jacking controls and jacking motor control centres should all
      be checked for full operational capacity prior to elevating the unit.

1.2     All spud cans should be checked to ensure that they are filled with water, and weather reports for the
         site obtained and checked for favourable elevating conditions.  Wind, wave and current directions
       should also be checked and the rig positioned with tugs and anchors to minimise swing and drift.  If the
        unit is allowed to drift or swing as the cans contact the bottom, severe damage to the cans or legs can
       occur.

2.    ELEVATING THE UNIT

2.1   The prevailing and future weather forecast should be obtained and  it should be ensured that the
       weather will not worsen during the period of elevation.

2.2    Water depth should be checked and an accurate measure at each leg location should be taken and
       recorded.

2.3    The pump tower is submersed as legs are lowered. When pumps are below surface, testing of pumps,
      hoses and connections must be undertaken.

2.4   The legs should be lowered to seabed so that they touch bottom simultaneously. The hull is then
       elevated maintaining a horizontal level plane within three tenths of a degree. A minimum air gap should
      be maintained between the bottom of the hull plating and the crest of the prevailing waves. The air gap
      must not exceed about three feet. At this point jacking should be stopped, the hull levelled and checks
     made to ensure that all brakes on the jacking unit are properly engaged.

3.    PRELOADING

3.1    The total amount of preload for the rig is the variable load on board plus the preload ballast. These are
      added together for the total required preload. The weight must be equally supported by all the legs.
      Leg penetration of the seabed should be recorded and a watch kept to observe  if any settling of the
       legs occurs.

3.2    Should differential settling in excess of one degree occur, the following steps should be taken:

        a)  Dump preload until total weight of unit is as determined in drilling contractor’s operating manual.
           This weight must be equally supported on all the legs.

        b)  Level the unit by jacking down the higher leg or legs.

        c)  Jack to required (preload) air gap.

        d)  Increase the preload to the required amount.

3.3       If differential settling continues whilst dumping the preload and it reaches one and a half degrees, then
       the unit should be levelled by jacking down on the higher leg(s). Dumping preload may continue during
       the levelling process.

3.4   When the unit is fully preloaded, it should be allowed to stabilise for a period of time. The period of time
         is determined by the soil condition of the area, for example in soft bottoms there should be no settling
         for a period of four hours with the entire preload applied.

3.5     After footings have proven solid, the preload should be dumped and the hull elevated to its final
        position. The unit must be maintained within three tenths of a degree of the horizontal level plane
      whenever it is in the elevated position.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 2 از 2 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  8200/JAK

                                                                  Rev.         :  2 (9/90)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  2 of 2

SUBJECT:  JACKING PROCEDURES

4.    DIFFERENTIAL LEG PENETRATION

4.1       If whilst preloading the unit a differential leg penetration of greater than that determined in the drilling
        contractor’s operating manual is sustained, then cores must be taken of the sub-seabed in order to
       determine the actual lithology. This is done so as to minimise the danger of “punch through” at a later
       stage in the operations. A number of accidents with jack-up rigs have been caused over recent years
      by this phenomena.

5.    PREPARATION FOR LOWERING THE UNIT

5.1       It must be ensured that the unit is seaworthy, and that variable load is less than the allowable maximum
      and positioned to provide equal loading on each leg. Ensure that rack chocks are disengaged.

5.2     Unit must have zero list and trim when afloat and variable load and ballast should be moved to achieve
         this.  Verification should be made that the vertical centre of gravity afloat, total weight of unit and
        calculated draft do not exceed the allowable maximum.

5.3    Weather forecasts should be checked to ensure favourable conditions.

6.    LOWERING THE UNIT

6.1    The hull should be lowered maintaining a horizontal level plane within three tenths of a degree.

6.2     Qualified operators and observers must be assigned to all key locations during the operation, and they
       should be in constant communication with each other.

6.3     All jacking systems and warning devices should have been checked previously to ensure correct
        operation.

6.4    Before the unit reaches water level, it must be ascertained that the mooring system and attending boats
       are in position to prevent movement while spud cans are still in contact with the ocean bottom.

6.5     Hull should be lowered to predetermined draft conditions for the afloat operations.   If cans do not free
       themselves the hull should be lowered to one foot more than the predetermined floating draft.   If they
       are not freed by this increase, then the jetting systems should be employed.

6.6       If it is necessary to utilise the jetting systems, the following procedure should be used:

        a)  As each leg is independently freed, raise it about 2m (5 ft).

        b)  When the final leg is freed, all the legs should be immediately raised to their towing position.

6.7   To minimise underwater effects, the unit should not be put under full tow until the legs have been raised
        to the tow position.


