

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 2 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  8300/SEM

                                                                  Rev.         :  0 (10/90)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  1 of 2

SUBJECT:  HEAVY WEATHER POLICY - GENERAL

1.    INTRODUCTION

      Extreme storm conditions at a particular location cannot be avoided.   It is therefore prudent to plan
       ahead, and where necessary make contingenciesfor such an event.

       Within the North Sea area, and in and around other parts of the British Isles, extensive historical
       weather data is available for analysis.  This data can be used to predict the most severe storms that
      can be expected for a particular location.

         Drilling activity in most northern, central and southern North Sea areas has been such that the above
       data is now well known and most drilling rigs have defined geographical areas for all year drilling
        operations.

     When a well is programmed for exploration or appraisal in an exposed and/or deep water location,
         historical weather data is used to check that the rig is capable of safely surviving the most severe storm
        conditions predicted for that location. A mooring analysis or jack-up structural study may be necessary
        to prove a unit’s suitability for a specific location with its associated environmental conditions.

          •  For semi-submersible rigs this could be to the West of Shetland.

          •  For jack-up rigs this could be in the central North Sea, or Irish Sea.

     BP Drilling, as responsible operator, undertakes three main areas of responsibility in planning for storm
        conditions:

          •  Fitness for Purpose.

          •  Monitoring and Maintenance.

          •  Preparation.

2.    FITNESS FOR PURPOSE

         All mobile drilling rigs are audited by BP Drilling prior to contract. Audits are conducted to ensure that
       the rig is “fit for purpose” and is capable of conducting the proposed drilling operations in a safe and
       cost effective manner.

      An essential feature of the audit is to ensure that the rigs mooring and propulsion systems (where fitted)
       are in good order. A weakness in either system would be highlighted and effectively resolved or the rig
       would not be considered suitable for the proposed workscope.

3.    MONITORING AND MAINTENANCE

        Effective monitoring and maintenance of the mooring, ballast and propulsion systems is effectively the
        responsibility of the the Offshore Installation Manager and Rig Owner.

      However, BP has two effective ways of monitoring rig performance:

          •  The BP Drilling Representative offshore has a responsibility to ensure that the rig staff maintain and
          operate the rig in a safe manner. He is the eyes and ears of the BP Drilling Management.

          • MSDD onshore receives daily rig reports which detail essential marine information such as mooring
          tensions and stability data. By monitoring such information and by assessing rig staff performance
          during rig moves, MSDD is in a position to evaluate and make recommendations to Drilling
         Management.


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 2 از 2 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
           BP EXPLORATION                              Section    :  8300/SEM

                                                                  Rev.         :  0 (10/90)
      DRILLING MANUAL     Page        :  2 of 2

SUBJECT:  HEAVY WEATHER POLICY - GENERAL

4.    PREPARATION

        Responsibility for the safety of the rig and its personnel rests with the Offshore Installation Manager and
        his senior management.  However, BP as a responsible operator also takes an active interest in
       preparatory work.

       Preparation for storm conditions should normally start with advance warning from a weather forecast.

      Weather Forecasts:

        Individual forecasts are telexed to each rig twice a day by a nominated forecasting contractor.

     A representative of the forecasting contractor visits MSDD at approximately 0830 each morning to
       discuss the forecasts in more detail. This arrangement ensures that all offshore and onshore staff are
       given the earliest indication of forecasted storm conditions.  Communication is conducted through
       normal channels between MSDD, DS and the BP Drilling Representative.

       Preparations on board the rig should take place as soon as a storm forecast is issued. Specific activity
        at this stage cannot be defined as  it will depend on the severity and imminence of the forecast and
       instructions contained in the rig’s Operations and Emergency Procedures Manuals.  However,
       consideration should always be given to the following:

       Rig operation in progress or planned at the time.

      Wind speed and direction.

      Sea and swell height, period and direction.

       Mooring tensions: original insurance tensions and balance between moorings.

        Anticipated or actual rig heave.

        Anticipated or actual riser offset.

      Making the well safe, prior to unlatching.

       Unlatching.

        De-ballasting rig to survival draft - time scale; adequate rig stability during transit and at survival draft.

         Availability of thrusters to assist in station keeping ability.

       Mooring tensions: adjustment of moorings to balance tensions during peak loads.