

────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 1 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
DRILLING PRACTICES
DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE





                                              13th - 17th November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 2 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

               DRILLING PRACTICES

              COURSE MANUAL



TABLE OF CONTENTS



Section 1     The Role of Well Construction in the Evaluation
             and Development of Oil and Gas Reserves

Section 2      Well Design Process

Section 3     Casing Design

Section 4       Drilling & Completion Fluids

Section 5     Cementing

Section 6       Bits

Section 7      Hydraulics & Hole Cleaning

Section 8        Drill String Design

Section 9      Surveying & Directional Drilling

Section 10    Formation Evaluation

Section 11    Rig Equipment & Sizing

Section 12      Drilling Problems

Section 13    Advances in Technology

Section 14    Subsea Systems

Section 15    Completion Equipment

Section 16     Technical Limit Drilling





                                    Page 1 of 1                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 3 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

                  SECTION 1
     THE ROLE OF WELL CONSTRUCTION IN THE
  EVALUATION AND DEVELOPMENT OF OIL AND GAS
                 RESERVES

     Contents
SECTION 1                                                                       1
1.0    Introduction                                                                  2
  1.1   Geological Appraisal                                                         2
  1.2   Geophysical Prospecting                                                      2
  1.3    Exploration Well Drilling                                                       3
  1.4    Appraisal Well Drilling                                                        4
  1.5   Development Well Drilling                                                     4
2.0   Licensing                                                                    4
3.0    Legislation                                                                   5
4.0   Operating Company Organisation                                                 5
  4.1    ExpIoration                                                                5
  4.2   Well Construction                                                           5
  4.3   Petroleum Engineering                                                       5
     4.3.1    Petroleum GeoIogy                                                      6
     4.3.2    Petrophysics                                                            6
     4.3.3    Reservoir Engineering                                                    6
     4.3.4    Production Technology                                                   6
     4.3.5    Operations                                                             6
     4.3.6   Economics                                                             6
  4.4   Well Services                                                               7
  4.5   Production                                                                 7
APPENDIX 1                                                                      8
Geophysical Survey Types                                                           8
1.0   Magnetic Surveys                                                             8
2.0    Gravity Surveys                                                               8
3.0   Seismic Surveys                                                              9
  3.1   Seismic Reflection Method                                                    9
  3.2   Seismic Refraction Method                                                   10
  3.3    Interpretation of Seismic Results                                               10
APPENDIX 2                                                                      12
Licensing & Legislation                                                              12
1.0   Licensing                                                                   12
  1.1    Legislation                                                                13





                                    Page 1 of 15                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 4 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

1.0  Introduction

     The evaluation and development of oil and gas reserves is a complex process requiring the
       interaction of numerous different disciplines. Well Construction forms a pivotal role in this
      process as it is responsible for constructing the conduit from the reservoir to surface.

The process of exploring for oil and gas can be broken down into a number of successive operations,
each more expensive and complex than the previous and each generating higher quality data. In
addition, at the end of each operation, the data is reviewed and the process amended or terminated as
required.

The main components are:

Geological Appraisal
Geophysical Prospecting
Exploration Drilling
Appraisal Drilling
Development Drilling

1.1  Geological Appraisal
The known geological data of a region is reviewed. Government bodies have an interest in the
economic geology of its sovereign territory and usually enforce laws, which maintain a database of all
geological activity within the territory. This means that data which may have been determined during
exploration for a particular mineral resource is available to other explorationists.  It is obvious that
regions of the earth with easy access have been explored in greater detail.

The objective is to identify the types of rocks in which oil and gas may have accumulated. These are
sedimentary rocks and the sequence of occurrence of the rocks can be related to other sequences in
which oil and gas have already been found. Unfortunately, the patterns in deposition are unreliable
and although patterns in one area may be similar to those where oil and gas have been found, little
confidence can be placed on them containing the correct structures to trap oil and gas and also
actually containing oil or gas.

Onshore a geological survey of surface features may be conducted  to confirm the geological
prognosis, or to fill in details which may be missing from existing surveys.

Offshore, this can be done with shallow drilling.

1.2  Geophysical Prospecting
Geophysical prospecting is the application of the principle of physics to the study of subsurface
geology.

Geophysical prospecting enhances the geological information already known about a formation. The
objective is to separate the basement rocks (those which were formed first and on which sedimentary
basins may have subsequently formed) from the sedimentary rocks since  oil and gas form  in
sedimentary rocks. Geophysical methods can be used to measure the thickness of sediments and to
measure the shape of structures within the sediments.

Geophysical surveys can be divided into two broad categories:

Reconnaissance surveys to outline possible areas of interest where there are thick sediments and the
possibility of structural traps
Detailed surveys to define well locations to test specific structures

The most commonly used geophysical methods used are:

Magnetic surveys which measure the anomalies  in the earth’s magnetic  field produced by the
magnetic properties of subsurface rocks


                                    Page 2 of 15                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 5 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

Gravity surveys which measure the anomalies in the earth’s gravitational field produced by the density
of the subsurface rocks
Seismic surveys that measure the time taken for sound waves to travel through subsurface rocks.

Magnetic and gravity surveys are generally reconnaissance methods.

Seismic surveys are generally detailed surveys.

The raw data from a seismic survey is electronically manipulated and output as a seismic section. This
is then interpreted to determine the depth and type of rocks present subsurface and the structures. It
contains no information of the fluid content of the rock.

Typical Seismic Section





Additional information on geophysical surveying techniques is attached for reference at the end of this
section.

1.3  Exploration Well Drilling
Based on the interpretation of the geological and geophysical studies, the decision may be made to
drill an exploration well. The location of the well is planned to intersect the features identified by the
geophysical surveys. The cuttings from the well are 4analysed by geologist at the well site to build a
geological model of the area. As the well is drilled, electric logs are run before the well is cased. These
logs measure the natural radiation and electrical potential of the sediments as well as resistivity and
sonic travel time. The logs run depend on the geology of each section of the well; the sediments
containing hydrocarbon are logged in greater detail.




                                    Page 3 of 15                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 6 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

The geological information and the log information are used to determine  if there are hydrocarbon
bearing zones. If there are, the nature and quantity of hydrocarbon, flow properties and pressure of
the hydrocarbon bearing zone must be assessed, as well as the depth at which the hydrocarbon
exists, the thickness of the zone and the presence of an aquifer.

Formation evaluation is the term used to cover this activity, although the techniques used vary widely.

Routinely, a repeat formation test (RFT) is conducted. A tool is lowered downhole and it is positioned
against the side of the borehole. It can then measure the pore pressure (the pressure in the pores of
the formation) at that depth and take a sample of the formation fluid. The tool is then released from the
side of the borehole and repositioned to take another pressure reading. The pressures and depths can
be correlated to examine the density of the fluid (and therefore the type of fluid) and the pore pressure
profile within the formation. These results identify the zones that contain hydrocarbon but not the
capacity nor the permeability of the formation. This is accomplished by flow tests termed drill stem
tests (DST), (since the  drill pipe  is used as a flow conduit during the  test). These are very
sophisticated tests which allow sections of the formation to flow as though they were on production.
During the  test, the pressure at the bottom of the well, the flow rates at the surface and the
composition of the fluids produced is measured. These indicate the volume of hydrocarbon in the zone
under test and the flow capacity or permeability of the zone. These tests may last 8 to 24 hours and
the data (in exploration wells especially) is treated confidentially. These tests are very expensive, and
when taken with the cost of drilling the well represent a massive investment.

The data from the exploration well (even  if  it was dry) are reviewed and a decision taken to  drill
appraisal wells.

1.4  Appraisal Well Drilling
The object of appraisal well drilling is to delineate the boundaries of the reservoir. In general,  if an
exploration  well has found  economically  interesting  formations,  appraisal  wells are  drilled  in
succession, in general, to the north, south, east and west of the location, ideally to intersect the
contacts between the oil and water and the oil and gas (if they are present). The exact location of the
wells cannot be planned (or there would be no need for appraisal) and the data from each well is
reviewed and the location of the next appraisal well changed accordingly. The logging and testing of
the appraisal wells is basically of the same format as the exploration well.

1.5  Development Well Drilling
If the results of the appraisal wells are economically encouraging, a development program for the field
is put into operation. This program will specify the number and location of development wells to be
drilled to fully cover the field and allow production and injection from or into the formations. The
development wells may or may not include the exploration well and the appraisal wells. As the wells
are drilled, they are logged and tested, the data augmenting the geological model of the formation and
modifying the flow model of the reservoir. The number of development wells dictates the size of the
platform required and the amount of ancillary equipment (water injection facilities, etc.) The estimate of
the reservoir size and the program of development well  drilling allows the determination of the
production profile for the field. This is significant from an engineering standpoint since it schedules the
work involved in bringing the reservoir into production and the remedial work, or workovers, expected
during the life of the field. It is also a financial schedule for the field since  it indicates the cash flow
associated with the production from the field. Taken together with the exploration costs, an estimate of
the overall profitability of the field can be made and also the requirements for finance (either borrowing
money or producing profit to pay back loans) during the life of the field. As part of this, the reserves
must be calculated. These are not fixed figures, since the acquisition of data and reassessment of the
reserves is related to the rate of drilling of the development wells and the data generated as the
reservoir is produced.

2.0  Licensing

In order to control the activities of companies engaged in the exploration and development of oil and
gas reserves, governments will normally sell off or lease the right to explore for hydrocarbons on their



                                    Page 4 of 15                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 7 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

sovereign territory. This licensing arrangement works in a multitude of different ways, dependent upon
where in the world the operation is taking place.

3.0  Legislation

Legislation varies from country to country, so it is always prudent to check the rules and regulations
applicable to the particular area being worked in. In addition it will be necessary to deal with a number
of different governmental bodies.

As a general rule of thumb there will always be a requirement for the following:

Environmental Impact Assessment or Statement
Approval to Locate a Rig
Approval to Drill a Well
Approval to Complete a Well
Approval to Abandon or Suspend a Well
Safety Case and Bridging Documents.

4.0  Operating Company Organisation

The interaction of the exploration, drilling, petroleum engineering and production personnel within an
organisation is a key factor in the efficient transfer of information and hence understanding of a
specific project. Each  oil company has  its own organisational structure and ways of conducting
business.

In some cases the above groups form distinct departments within the organisation, whereas in others,
the structure evolves from a limited number of departments and therefore would involve a combination
of groups, such as exploration and petroleum engineering or well services and production.

A typical structure includes geology/geophysics, well construction which includes well engineering and
drilling operations, petroleum engineering, well services and production which comprises maintenance
operations and planning. It can be seen that the range of disciplines involved in petroleum engineering
is quite extensive and in many situations, this broad range of capabilities is used to co-ordinate across
the time span of the exploration, development and production phases.

4.1  ExpIoration
The  exploration department  will be  responsible  for  identifying  structures  for  consideration  for
development and providing a substructure map of the prospect. The responsibility of exploration would
be to further update, refine and modify the substructure map and reservoir modelling in accordance
with the increased amount of data which becomes available during the development programme. The
exploration department  will further be required to provide guidance on the selection of final well
locations in the development plan  in conjunction with the reservoir engineers, within petroleum
engineering, who will be assessing the recovery of oil or gas from the structure as a function of the
final well locations.

4.2  Well Construction
The well construction department is responsible for the safe and efficient drilling of the well to defined
targets and locations identified by exploration and petroleum engineering. They are further charged
with the responsibility of ensuring that all evaluation work is conducted safely and in accordance with
the requirements of the other departments. In  this context, there  will generally be two specific
functions within well construction, namely - operations, which are responsible for the day to day
supervision and planning of individual wells and well engineering, which will be responsible for the
adaptation and development of new or improved technology for inclusion in the drilling programmes.
4.3  Petroleum Engineering
      Petroleum engineering is a broad-based discipline which has a prolonged input to reservoir
      evaluation and development.



                                    Page 5 of 15                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 8 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

4.3.1 Petroleum GeoIogy
Normally there will be geological specialists within the department who will work closely with the
petrophysicists and reservoir engineers to ensure that locations of individual wells, and the evaluation
process, is carried out efficiently and yields the required information to improve the reservoir model
developed by the company.

4.3.2 Petrophysics
    A petrophysicist  is responsible  for recommending the wireline logs which  will be run into
       individual wellbores and for the analysis of those logs to yield information relating to the
       reservoir structure and fluid composition. This function is therefore crucial to ensuring that the
      exploration and development wells yield the required information to provide detail within the
      geological structure model.

4.3.3 Reservoir Engineering
Reservoir engineering is a broad discipline and as such reservoir engineers will be responsible for the
following areas of technology.

The properties and performance of reservoir fluids.
The response of the reservoir rock to the production process.
Assessment of the response of a reservoir to the production or depletion process.
Identifying and recommending the means by which oil recovery can be enhanced or improved e.g.
pressure maintenance or by the use of enhanced oil recovery.

In general terms, the reservoir engineer is charged with the responsibility of ensuring that the reservoir
can be exploited as effectively as possible and that the reservoir energy available within the fluid is
fully utilised to maximise the potential recovery from the reservoir.

4.3.4 Production Technology
The production  technologist,  or  engineer,  is responsible  for the  wellbore and  the completion
equipment installed within  it and also with the consequences of production in terms of the reservoir
fluids e.g. the tendency for scale, wax or asphaltene deposition. In the cycle of reservoir evaluation
and development, production technologists will be heavily involved in the design and selection of
equipment which  will be installed inside the wellbore and  will be required to withstand operating
conditions and the  fluids but  in the longer term development  of the  reservoir, the production
technologist will be charged with maintaining the wells at their peak operating efficiency and ensuring
that maximum recovery is achieved. This may necessitate the implementation of workovers to correct
mechanical or reservoir problems which may arise as a result of continued production.

4.3.5 Operations
The  operations group  within petroleum  engineering  provides  the necessary  link between  the
operational groups within well construction, who will be responsible for the drilling of the exploration
and development wells, and the evaluation and technical specialists within petroleum engineering for
whom the well is being drilled to yield the necessary information for the reservoir modelling. The
operations section therefore requires a detailed understanding of the role of well construction and also
of the various disciplines within petroleum engineering to ensure they can provide the effective co-
ordination necessary.

4.3.6 Economics
The role of economics is fundamental to the evaluation, development and abandonment of reservoirs
and wells.  It is seen as being the means by which technical information can be transmitted into
management terms to allow decisions to be made regarding future investment or abandonment of
projects.





                                    Page 6 of 15                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 9 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

4.4  Well Services
The role of well services is to specify and prepare completion equipment for installation inside the
wellbore and then to periodically conduct repair work within the wellbore to replace malfunctioning
components.

4.5  Production
The production department is responsible for the ongoing and continuous production of fluids from the
reservoir. Their responsibility is therefore to monitor and control production in such a way as to
maximise the recovery of reserves from the reservoir. The planning of production rates and production
plateaux are frequently based upon reservoir models generated by reservoir engineering within the
petroleum engineering section and  will be implemented by the production department. Since the
production department is responsible for the development wells once they are in production, it is their
responsibility to ensure the wells are maintained in peak operating capacity and as such they will be
responsible for co-ordinating all maintenance work required within the platform and also around the
individual wells.





                                    Page 7 of 15                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 10 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


APPENDIX 1

Geophysical Survey Types

1.0  Magnetic Surveys

The igneous and metamorphic rocks of the basement complex are magnetic in varying degrees and
create anomalies in the earth's magnetic field. Sedimentary rocks are practically non-magnetic and
magnetic measurements on or above the surface of a sedimentary basin are, therefore, separated
from the source of the anomalies by the thickness of the sediments. As the magnitude of an anomaly
is related to the distance from  its source, the method can be used to deduce the thickness of
sediments overlying the basement. The major tectonic trends of the basement may also be revealed
by magnetic surveys. Since lava flows and igneous intrusions usually have quite strong magnetic
effects their presence in sediments can be detected by this method.

The earth's magnetic field is very weak, varying from 60,000 gammas in a vertical direction at the
magnetic poles to about half that intensity in a horizontal direction at the magnetic equator. The
magnetic field between the poles of a small horseshoe magnet is about 1000 times the strength of the
earth's magnetic field. The magnitude of anomalies that are significant in oil exploration varies from a
few gammas to a few hundred gammas.

The anomalies are measured by magnetometers suspended from aircraft flying at a specified altitude
along specified flight lines which may be 1 mile apart or up to 20 miles apart, depending on the
resolution of the survey. The instruments may measure anomalies to a few hundredths of a gamma.
Continuous recordings are made of the magnetic field during the survey, and readings from a ground
magnetometer ensure that there are no magnetic storms during the survey.

The results are corrected for variations in the earth's magnetic field and the effects of the sun, for
errors in the survey procedure and for known regional effects. Maps are constructed with contours to
show the anomalies. In favourable circumstances, some indication of basement structure may be
obtained, along with the separation of near surface and basement effects.

2.0  Gravity Surveys

Gravity surveys measure the effect on the earth's gravitational field of variations in the density of
subsurface rocks. Basement rocks have in general a higher density than the overlying sediments and
where this is the case anomalously high gravity values are recorded when the basement rocks
approach the surface. Conversely, low gravity values are recorded over depressions in the basement
surface. Gravity surveys can therefore be used to outline sedimentary basin development and show
structural trends in the basin. Variations in the density also occur in the sedimentary rocks and when
older and denser rocks are brought near the surface in the cores of anticlines and other structures,
anomalously high gravity values are recorded. The density of salt is usually lower than that of the
surrounding rocks and anomalously low gravity values are frequently associated with salt structures
such as salt domes.

The earth's gravity field varies from 983.221 gals at the poles to 978.048 gals at the equator. As
anomalies of the order of 0.001 gal can be significant in oil exploration the unit in gravity surveys is a
milligal. Gravimeters are sensitive instruments that can measure changes in gravity Of 0.01 milligal,
i.e. one part in one millionth of the earth's gravity field.

The instrument height must be known for each reading and the procedure in time consuming in rough
terrain. Ship surveys house the instrument on a gyroscopically stabilised platform to minimise the
movement of the ship.

The survey is conducted along a specified number of traverses, spaced from 0.5 to 1 mile apart. The
readings are corrected for elevation, latitude, topography and diurnal variations and are plotted on a
map, contoured to show the variations in the magnetic field. The interpretation of the anomalies
depends on knowledge of the shapes of the subsurface structures. This information is unknown during


                                    Page 8 of 15                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 11 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

exploration and therefore the gravity survey data are usually used to provide leads  for further
geophysical exploration.

3.0  Seismic Surveys

The study of the form and occurrence of earthquake waves recorded by seismographs has been the
principal source of knowledge of the constitution of the interior of the earth. Using a special type of
seismograph,  or  geophone,  seismic  surveys  explore  the  geological  structure  in  the  earth's
sedimentary section by recording the ground movements produced by man-made explosions. The
waves created by the explosions are reflected back to the earth's surface by the elastic discontinuities
that occur at changes of rock types in the sediments. Seismic surveys are divided into two categories
depending on the path taken by the waves  in the sediments between the explosion and the
geophones. They are termed the "reflection" and "refraction" methods. Seismic surveys provide more
detailed information about the shape and depth of subsurface structures than any of the other
geophysical methods. They are the methods most frequently used in the exploration for oil and gas.

Both seismic methods measure the time taken by the waves to travel from the explosion, or shot-point,
to the geophones. It is therefore necessary to record both the time of the shot and the time of arrival of
the waves at the geophones. The travel times are rarely longer than 6 seconds and are measured to I
thousandth of a second. The information is recorded on magnetic tape in the field and the tapes are
subsequently processed in a data-processing centre.

3.1  Seismic Reflection Method
Reflection surveying  is similar in principle to echo-sounding at sea, where an acoustic signal is
transmitted from a ship and reflected back to the surface by the sea bottom. The time taken by the
signal to return to the surface is converted to the water depth from a knowledge of the velocity of the
signal in water. The reflecting horizons in seismic surveys occur at changes in the circumstances of
geological formations and these are not usually as clearly defined as the sea bottom. Also, there are
generally many changes of formation within the sedimentary section so that a seismic reflection record
may contain many reflections and is therefore more complicated than an echo-sounder record.

The reflected energy is recorded by groups of geophones laid on the ground at equally spaced
intervals (50 or 100 meters apart) along a line. The number of groups used to record each shot may
be 24, 48 or as high as 96 and hence the spread length with 50m spacing between geophone groups
varies from 1200m to 4800m. The ground movements resulting from the energy released by the shot
cause the geophones to generate small electrical impulses which are taken by cable to a conveniently
located recording station where the impulses from each of the groups are amplified and recorded in
digital form on magnetic tape. A monitor record on photographic paper is also taken to check that a
satisfactory record is obtained. The shpt point can be located either at the centre of the spread or at
one end of the spread.

The geophones record all ground movements and a reflection record is complicated by the effects of
extraneous movements from  natural and man-made sources and from the shot  itself. These
movements, which are called "noise", tend to obscure the reflected energy and field techniques are
designed to minimise the noise on the record and enhance the reflections. The noise affecting a
reflection record can be reduced by varying the number and the spacing of the geophones in a group,
by employing a pattern of shot holes instead of a single shot and by the use of electrical filters in the
amplifiers. However, the greatest improvement in signal to noise ratio is obtained by the use of
multiple coverage of "common depth  point' (CDP) shooting as  it  is commonly called, and  this
technique is now almost universally employed on reflection surveys. In this technique the shot point
and geophone stations are moved along the line between shots and hence multiple records are
obtained corresponding to reflections from the same subsurface points, i.e. CDP's. The number of
stations by which the source and geophone stations are moved along the  line between shots
determines the multiplicity of cover. The records corresponding to each common depth point are
added together during the processing of the data to enhance the reflections and cancel out the
random noise.

Although the seismic reflection method can be applied to both marine and land surveying, the different
problems associated with them require different operational techniques.


                                    Page 9 of 15                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 12 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


On land the energy source is normally a small explosive charge detonated in a shallow drilled hole,
but falling weight and vibrating plate sources are also available. These have much less energy than a
dynamite charge, but addition of signals from repeated drops or vibrations improves the signal to noise
ratio to compensate for this. The geophone cable is connected in sections so that a "roll-along"
technique may be used in which the last recording section can be moved to the front, thus moving the
spread along the line.

The seismic reflection method has been adapted very successfully to the exploration of marine areas.
The recording and shooting operations can be conducted from a single ship, which houses the
recording instruments and tows a neutrally buoyant cable containing the geophones.

In marine work, the energy sources used are generally non-dynamite sources, such as compressed
air or gasses exploding under water or an electric discharge under water. These sources are towed at
the rear of the ship at a suitable depth beneath the surface of the sea. Under favourable weather
conditions surveys can proceed much faster at sea than on land because drilling of shot holes is
eliminated and the geophone spread moves continuously along the line. As a consequence of this, the
degree of multiplicity of subsurface coverage recorded on marine surveys is generally higher than that
recorded on land surveys. As in all geophysical surveys, accurate position fixing is an important and
integral part of the operation and at sea one of the radio navigational aids, such as the Decca system,
is generally used in conjunction with the Satellite Navigational system.

Seismic data is recorded on magnetic tape in digital form and processing of the data is undertaken by
computer. All of the standard processes that are applied to reflection records prior to the interpretation
of the results can be handled by computer. The results are output as seismic sections through the
sediments and skilled operators can then interpret these to determine structures.

3.2  Seismic Refraction Method
A portion of the seismic energy from a shot is refracted at the elastic discontinuities that occur within
and at the base of the sedimentary section. When the formation below a discontinuity has a wave
velocity higher than the overlying formations, the waves are refracted along the higher velocity
formation and give rise to waves that return to the earth's surface. The waves are detected at the
surface by geophones and recorded with equipment similar to that used for reflection surveys.

The distance between the shot and the return of the waves to the surface depends on the depth of the
refracting formation. When the sedimentary section contains a number of refracting formations of
increasing velocity at successively greater depths, waves from each formation are recorded in turn as
the distance form the shot  is increased. By selecting the appropriate shot to geophone spread
distance and moving both shot and spread along a line, continuous subsurface coverage of the
refracting horizon is obtained. The depth and shape of the refracting formation can be calculated from
the travel time recorded along a line.

A refraction spread is laid out in line with the shot-point, with the geophones spaced at equal intervals
along the spread. The distance between the geophone stations is generally about 1000 feet and a
spread of 24 geophones covers a distance of nearly 5 miles. Refraction observations are made at
distances of 15 miles or more when a deep formation is mapped and at this distance charges of up to
3 tons of explosive may be required to give adequate refracted energy.

3.3  Interpretation of Seismic Results
The object of a seismic survey is the location and detailing of structural traps in which oil may have
accumulated. The initial program of seismic lines depends on the existing knowledge of the area and
may vary from widely spaced reconnaissance lines over unexplored territory to a detailed survey to
assist in the location of development wells. It is usual for lines to be added to the program either as the
work develops or as a follow-up to the results of the first survey. In the case of marine seismic surveys
it is generally the latter, as the field work is often completed several weeks before the results can be
processed and interpreted. When the field records have been processed the travel times to the
reflecting or refracting formations are plotted on maps and contours drawn through equal time values.
A separate map  is drawn for each formation. The time-contour, or isochron, maps show  all the
structural features, but depth-contour maps are more convenient for exploration purposes.

                                   Page 10 of 15                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 13 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


     As the velocities that must be used in the conversion of time to depth maps can vary from 4000
       feet per second for unconsolidated near-surface sediments, to 6000 - 13000 feet per second for
      sandstones and shales and 14000 - 20000 feet per second for limestones,  it is essential to
      determine the appropriate velocity for each area. It is also essential to recognise any significant
       velocity variations in an area, as these can cause an appreciable change in the shape of the
      contours as they are converted to depth. The direct method of measuring velocities of seismic
     waves in the sedimentary section is to lower a geophone into a well and measure the travel
      times from shots near the surface to various depths in the well. However, velocity information is
      frequently required before the first well is drilled and can be obtained from a statistical analysis
       of reflection data. The development of common depth point shooting methods has increased the
     amount of data available for velocity analysis. The velocities recorded on refraction lines are
      another source of information. When a well has been drilled a continuous velocity log may be
      run in the hole. The log is recorded by an instrument which measures and integrates travel
      times over short portions of the well. The accuracy of the integration is checked at selected
      depths by comparison with the travel times measured directly with a geophone.

The picking of the times to the various reflection horizons to be mapped on a seismic section and the
processing of the maps (contouring) can be done by computer, to allow the conversion of travel time
into depth, and hence the production of isopach maps.





                                   Page 11 of 15                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 14 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

APPENDIX 2

The following is an extract from the web page of the UK Government Department of Trade and
Industry
Licensing & Legislation

1.0  Licensing

The Petroleum Act 1998, which consolidated a number of provisions previously contained in five
separate pieces  of primary  legislation  (including the Petroleum  (Production) Act  1934), vests
ownership of oil and gas within Great Britain and its territorial sea in the Crown and gives Government
rights to grant licences to explore for and exploit these resources and those on the UK Continental
Shelf (UKCS). The designated area of the UKCS has been refined over the years by a series of
designations under the Continental Shelf Act 1964 following the conclusion of boundary agreements
with neighbouring states, the most recent being that reached with the Faeroe Islands in May 1999.

Regulations re-enacted under the 1998 Act set out how applications for licences may be made and
specify the Model Clauses to be incorporated into the licences. The regulations currently in force are
the Petroleum (Production) (Seaward Areas) Regulations 1988 as amended by the Petroleum
(Production) (Seaward Areas) Amendment Regulations 1990, 1992, 1995 and 1996 for offshore
licences, and the Petroleum (Production) (Landward Areas) Regulations 1995 for onshore licences.
Both sets of regulations are currently under review and may be superseded in the near future.

All applications for Production Licences are assessed against the same criteria. Decisions about
licence awards take account of the applicant's financial, technical and environmental capabilities as
well as the geological rationale for the application and the proposed work programme that will be
carried out in the event of a licence being granted.

Licence Types
The terms of licences vary according to whether they cover Seaward or Landward areas. The terms,
duration and relinquishment requirements as set out  in the licensing regulations vary between
Licensing Rounds and are dependent on the amount of exploration and development that has already
taken place in the area of the acreage on offer. Whilst applications for Landward and Seaward
Licences are assessed on the basis of the same criteria, the respective licensing rounds are held
separately.

Seaward Licences
For licensing purposes the UKCS is divided into quadrants of 1° of latitude by 1° of longitude (except
where the coastline, "bay closing line" or a boundary line intervenes). Each quadrant  is further
partitioned into 30 blocks each of 10 x 12 minutes. The average block size is about 250 square km
(roughly 100 square miles). Relinquishment requirements on successive licences have created blocks
subdivided into as many as six part blocks in some mature areas.
There are two types of Seaward Licences:

Exploration Licences which are non-exclusive, permit the holder to conduct non-intrusive surveys,
such as seismic or gravity and magnetic data acquisition, over any part of the UKCS that is not held
under a Production Licence.

Wells may be drilled under these licences but must not exceed 350 metres in depth without the
approval of the Secretary of State. These licences may be applied for at any time and are granted to
applicants who have the technical and financial resources to undertake such work. Each licence is
valid for three years, renewable at the Secretary of State's discretion for one further term of three
years. An application fee is charged together with an annual rental. Exploration licence holders may
be commercial geophysical survey  contractors  or  licence Operators. A commercial  contractor
acquiring data over unlicensed acreage may market such data.

Production licences grant exclusive rights to holders "to search and bore for, and get, petroleum", in
the area of the licence covering a specified block or blocks. They are usually issued in periodic
"Licensing Rounds", when the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry invites applications in respect
of a number of specified blocks or other areas. An application fee  is charged and successful


                                   Page 12 of 15                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 15 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

applicants make an initial rental payment for the first term of the licence, followed by annual rentals, on
an escalating scale.

Many activities carried out under a Production Licence are subject to the consent of the Secretary of
State and may require compliance with other legislative provisions and specific conditions attached to
the consent.

Landward Licences
The Landward regime applies in Great Britain to all territory above low water mark and within "bay
closing lines" as defined in regulations; a separate regime is operated in Northern Ireland. The
Petroleum  (Production) (Landward  Areas)  Regulations 1995  introduced a  single  licence,  the
Petroleum Exploration and Development Licence (PEDL), as the principal Landward Licence to
replace the previous three licence system that covered the various stages of the full development
cycle - exploration, appraisal and production.

For Landward purposes, blocks are the 10 km x 10 km grid squares of the National Grid, except where
intersected by "bay closing lines" or by an existing licence.

There are two other Landward Licences: Supplementary Seismic Survey Licences (SSSLs) which
allow seismic acquisition to extend slightly beyond the licensed area and Methane Drainage Licences
(MDLs) which allow mine operators to extract gas from workings for safety reasons. Other Coalbed
Methane projects require full PEDLs. Five older types of licence are also currently valid but not now
issued: Mining Licences (MLs), issued during or before 1967; Production Licences (PLs), issued
between 1968 and 1984; and three types of licence introduced in 1984 to cover the identifiable stages
of activity: Exploration Licences (EXLs), Appraisal Licences (ALs) and Development Licences (DLs).

Before Licensees can carry out any site activity they must obtain approval from the DTI to shoot
seismic (notification only), drill wells and develop fields, plus any necessary planning permission from
local Government authorities and access rights from the landowner(s). Licensees wishing to enter or
drill through coal seams must seek the permission of the Coal Authority.

The terms and relinquishment requirements on Landward Licences vary according to the type of
licence in question. The oldest MLs were originally granted for a term of 50 years with the last due to
expire in 2017. In contrast the terms of PLs vary according to the regulations governing them. The last
of these is also due to expire in 2017. The outstanding EXLs are valid for an initial term of 6 years, as
are the current PEDLs, with further extensions of 5 and 20 years being granted at the discretion of the
Secretary of State (at least 50% of the area must be relinquished at the end of the initial 6-year term).

1.1  Legislation
The obligations of the oil and gas industry in the UK are set out in a legal framework of Acts and
Regulations. The Petroleum Operations Notices (PONs), relating to both Landward and Seaward
areas,  outline  in more  detail  the requirements on Licensees  to  fulfil these  obligations  whilst
undertaking exploration, appraisal and development activities. Additional information may also be
requested  if  it  is deemed necessary for a specific task. Currently there are 16 PONs providing
guidance on topics including pollution control, well consents and the environment. The PONs are
updated as appropriate and the current version of any PON can be obtained from the DTI Oil and Gas
Directorate's web  site  address:  http://www.og.dti.gov.uk/regs/reg_home.htm. The  following  is a
discussion on the application of PONs to well and seismic operations and record keeping, following
operational rather than numerical ordering.  It does not encompass the  full guidance relating to
operations but that information most relevant to day to day activities.




SEISMIC & SAMPLING OPERATIONS

Notification: PON14 requires licence holders of Exploration, Production or Landward Licences to
notify the DTI and other interested parties (specified in the licence conditions) at least 28 days before
the proposed geophysical or sampling survey is due to commence or 40 days in the case of activity in


                                   Page 13 of 15                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 16 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

watery areas. A minimum of 14 days notice is required for a seismic survey carried out over a
proposed well site.

Data Requirement: The seismic navigation data should be sent to the Directorate, ideally within 3
months of acquisition; this applies to both 'Speculative' and 'Group' shoots. Only  if requested by the
Directorate should the actual seismic data, site survey data, magnetic and gravity data be supplied.

WELL OPERATIONS

Consent: As part of the consent process for well operations, the DTI consults with various other
Government Departments and non-Governmental bodies with regard  to a proposed  well. Each
application to drill (PON4) is considered with respect to the fulfilment of specific licence obligations
and the impact on the environment and other users of the sea e.g. shipping. Drilling and petroleum
developments offshore are subject to the requirements of the Offshore Petroleum Production and
Pipe-lines (Assessment  of Environmental  Effects) Regulations 1999 which implement  the EU
Environmental Impact Assessment Directive (PON15 & 16). A full environmental statement may be
required for wells which are determined to be likely to have significant effect on the environment by
virtue of their nature, size or location.

The technical aspects of well applications (PON4) are processed within 21 days of receipt. Further
consents to sidetrack (PON4), workover or complete (PON8), suspend or abandon (PON5) are
normally handled more quickly. Suspended wells are regarded as a short-term measure that needs to
be fully justified.

The DTI plans to reduce the administrative burden on industry by implementing changes to the well
consent process that will eliminate the need for a separate consent for many well operations. Further
benefit will derive from the move to the electronic domain, using internet technologies. It is anticipated
that the electronic system will be operational by the end of 2000.
Safety is dealt with by the Health and Safety Executive (HSE) which also requires a 21 day notification
period for well applications. The Offshore Installations and Wells (Design and Construction, etc.)
Regulations 1996 are applicable to these activities.

Data Requirement: The collection of data starts once the well has spudded and the Operator sends
in a "spud" fax. The DTI issues the official well number (PON12) to be used for all data and records
resulting from its drilling. All well data, including core and cuttings material, are sent to the Directorate
at various locations, as set out in the PON9, within six months of the well operations finishing. They
are then held confidentially for a period of five years.

Onshore operators have a statutory obligation to also supply well data to the British Geological Survey
(BGS).

DATA STORAGE

Well and Seismic Records: Under a Petroleum Licence  all parties to a licence are jointly and
severally responsible to the Secretary of State for keeping records. PON9 sets out the 'record and
sample requirements for surveys and wells' and the location of that data receipt. Historically the
Directorate has undertaken its own cataloguing and storage of these data.

CDA: Since 1995, Common Data Access Limited (CDA), a consortium of oil and service companies
has provided a shared data storage and associated services, for data items gathered in the process of
exploration, appraisal and development activities on the UKCS. The first phases of CDA, the digital
well data and the seismic navigation data stages, are almost complete. The hardcopy well data
scanned image project will be complete by the end of 2000. The provision of data by CDA members to
CDA will discharge them of their obligations to provide such data to the Secretary of State under the
Model Clauses for those data items.

Listed below are those PONs currently maintained by the DTI:


    PON No.    Subject Matter
     1             Oil Pollution

                                   Page 14 of 15                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 17 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
               DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

2          Loss or Dumping of Synthetic Materials or other Refuse at sea
3        Damage to Submarine Telecommunications Cables and Plant
             Application  for Consent  to  Drill  Exploration,  Appraisal, and
4
           Development Wells
5            Application to Abandon or Temporarily Abandon a Well
6         Measurement of Petroleum
7           Reporting of Petroleum Production
8            Application to complete and/or Workover a Well
9          Record and Sample Requirements for Surveys and Wells
10        Buoys
11         Report on Incidents During Well Operations
12         Department of Trade and Industry Well Numbering System
             Applications for Consent to Drill or Re-enter HP/HT Exploration
13
          and Appraisal Wells
14           Notification of Seismic Surveys (Word 6.0 format, 70kbytes)
15        Assessment of Environmental Effects





                              Page 15 of 15                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 18 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

                    SECTION 2
             WELL DESIGN PROCESS

     Contents
1.0   Overview                                                                    2
2.0    Preliminary Well Design                                                        2
  2.1   Issue Preliminary Basis of Design                                               2
  2.2   Basis of Design Reviewed, Challenged, Modified, Agreed                            2
  2.3   Design Options Generated and Costed                                           3
  2.4   Design Options Reviewed, Preferred Option Identified                               3
  2.5   Decision To Proceed                                                         4
  2.6   Procurement Initiated                                                        4
     2.6.1    Contracts                                                              4
     2.6.2    Materials                                                               6
  2.7   Well Placed On Rig Schedule                                                  6
3.0    Detailed Well Design                                                           6
  3.1    Initiate Site Survey                                                           6
  3.2   Prepare Detailed Well Design                                                  7
  3.3   Prepare and Submit AFE                                                      7
  3.4   Perform Risk Analysis                                                        8
  3.5   Peer Review Design                                                         8
  3.6   Approve Design                                                             8
  3.7   Prepare Contingency Plans                                                    8
  3.8   Confirm Contracts and Materials                                                9
4.0   Prepare Well Program                                                          9
  4.1   Prepare Environmental Impact Assessment                                       9
  4.2   Prepare Emergency Response Plan                                             9
  4.3   Prepare Bridging Document                                                   9
  4.4   Prepare HSE Plan                                                          10
  4.5   Prepare Drilling Program                                                     10
  4.6   Prepare Consent Documentation                                               10
  4.7     Drill Well On Paper                                                         10
5.0   Execute Well Program                                                         10
6.0   Analyse and Improve Performance                                               10
APPENDIX 1                                                                      11
Sample Well / Drilling Program Format                                                 11





                                    Page 1 of 11                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 19 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


1.0  Overview

     The Well Construction Process can be broken down into 5 sequential phases of work, as
       follows:

       1.    Preliminary Well Design
       2.    Detailed Well Design
       3.    Prepare Drilling Program
       4.    Execute Well Program
       5.    Analyse and Improve Performance

      Well design focuses primarily on the preliminary and detailed well design and the preparation of
      the drilling program.

2.0  Preliminary Well Design

      Preliminary well design is essentially a screening stage of the well design process.
     The major steps are shown below.


                                 BoD reviewed,                                    Design options
                                                                  Design options
                 Issue preliminary              challenged,                                         reviewed
                                                                    generated and
                  Basis of Design             modified and                                        Preferred option
                                                                         costed
                                             agreed                                                      identified




                    Decision to              Procurement            Well placed on rig        Move to detailed
                    proceed                        initiated                  schedule                   well design

2.1  Issue Preliminary Basis of Design
     Once the geological and geophysical studies have identified a potential well location, the sub
      surface team will work up a Basis of Design. This is the information that gets handed over to the
      Well Construction team and forms the basis of the well design. The Basis of Design  will
      generally provide information on the following:

      •   Well Name and Number
      •   Well Objectives
      •   Total Depth
      •   Surface Location
      •  Water Depth
      •   Target Location
      •   Target Size and Tolerance
      •   Target Constraints
      •   Geological Prognosis
      •   Seismic Section
      •   Expected Hydrocarbons
      •   Anticipated Pore Pressures
      •   Anticipated Temperature Profile
      •   Offset Wells
      •   Geological Hazards (shallow gas, faulting, H2S, CO2, lease line restrictions, flowlines, etc.)
      •   Additional Constraints (drilled before a certain date, etc.)
      •   Evaluation Program (details and justification of required wireline logs, coring and testing)

2.2  Basis of Design Reviewed, Challenged, Modified, Agreed
     The Basis of Design will be reviewed at a meeting held between Well Construction and the
      relevant subsurface groups. The aim of this meeting is to ensure a common understanding of
      the goals and objectives of the well and how they will be achieved.
                                    Page 2 of 11                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 20 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


          If necessary certain aspects of the Basis of Design will be challenged and where necessary
      modified. This normally relates to the evaluation program and criteria relating to the target size
     and tolerance.

     Once any modifications are made representatives of the sub surface and well construction
     teams sign off the Basis of Design.

2.3  Design Options Generated and Costed
     The Drilling Engineer will take the signed off Basis of Design and generate a number of design
       options.

     As a first step the Drilling Engineer will review all of the available offset data and regional data.
      Typical offset data reviewed includes:

      •    Pore and Fracture Pressure Plots
      •    Time Depth Curves
      •     Daily Drilling Reports
      •     Daily Mud Reports
      •     Final Well Reports
      •   Mud Logging Records
      •     Bit Records
      •    Casing and Cementing Reports
      •    Survey Records

      This will give the Drilling Engineer an understanding of how previous wells were drilled, what
      problems were experienced and how they were solved, what casing program was used, what
    mud type and weights was used, any directional problems experienced, how long the well took
       to drill, etc.

        All of the offset data is normally compiled into an Offset Data Pack for future reference.

     The Drilling Engineer will take the offset data and the Basis of Design and work up a series of
       different design options. This will normally involve a number of different casing schematics or
       variations on well trajectories.

     The selection of casing setting depths will be discussed in more detail in the Casing Design
       section.

      For each option the Drilling Engineer will generate the following information

      •     Provisional Trajectory
      •    Casing Schematic
      •     Provisional Mud Program, including mud types and weights
      •     Provisional Cement Program, including tops of cements and slurry types
      •    Torque and Drag Assessment
      •    Budgetary Time Estimate
      •    Budgetary Cost Estimate
      •    Hazard Assessment

2.4  Design Options Reviewed, Preferred Option Identified
     The Drilling Engineer will present the various well design options at a peer review meeting.
      Present at this meeting will be the members of the sub-surface team and various members of
      the Well Construction team.

     The aim of the meeting is to ensure that all the requirements of the basis of design have been
     met by the various design options, that all hazards have been identified and to agree on a
      preferred option to carry forward to detailed design.

                                    Page 3 of 11                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 21 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


          If a radical new design is being proposed then additional study work might be required to prove
     up a particular aspect of the design or to eliminate or reduce a particular hazard e.g. elimination
       of a casing string, using a surface stack from a semi-submersible, using “unusual” hole sizes,
     new mud systems, etc.

2.5  Decision To Proceed
     Once the preferred option has been identified the sub-surface group inputs the budgetary cost
      estimate into an economics model to determine if the well meets the economic criteria laid down
     by the operating company.

          It is also likely that, at this stage, a series of discussions will be held with the other partners in
      the well to confirm their acceptance of the proposed well design and economics.

2.6  Procurement Initiated
     Once the decision to proceed has been received then the Well Construction department initiates
      the procurement process. Procurement can be broken down into two main areas:

      •    Contracts
      •     Materials

2.6.1 Contracts
      Contracts are required to cover all of the services required to drill a well. Typical contracts are
      required to cover the following:

      •     Site Survey
      •      Drilling Rig
      •    Rig Moving
      •   Mud Logging
      •     Wireline Logging
      •   Mud Logging
      •     Directional Drilling and Surveying
      •   ROV
      •     Helicopters
      •    Supply Boats
      •    Supply Base Facilities
      •      Drilling Tools (Jars, Accelerators, etc.)
      •     Fishing Tools
      •    Cementing
      •      Drilling Fluids

    How the contracts are tendered and awarded depend upon the particular operating company
      practices and any applicable legislation. For example in the European Union (EU), all contracts
     must be pre-qualified according to a specific set of rules.

2.6.1.1 Contracting Strategy
          Typical contracts that are used for drilling rigs include the following:

         •  Day-work Drilling
         •  Incentive Based Day-work Drilling
         •  Lump Sum
         •  Footage
         •  Limited Turnkey Drilling
         •  Integrated Project Management



                                    Page 4 of 11                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 22 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
             DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

Each of these has various merits, as discussed below. Which type of contract is awarded
depends very much on the particular operator's preference and capabilities.

Day-work Drilling

•   Conventional operating arrangement
•   Operator assumes ALL the risk of drilling the well
•    Drilling Contractor and other Third Part service providers compensated for work done on
   a daily basis
•    All consumables charged to the operators account
•  Most clear cut

Incentive Based Day-work Drilling

•   Risk shared by Operator and Contractors
•   Basic metrics are set
•   Performance measured against the prognosed drilling curve
•     If the well is drilled ahead of schedule, a ‘proportionate’ bonus is paid
•     If  the  well  takes  longer  than prognosed, a  penalty  is  applied  to  the  contractor
   compensations
•  The bonus and penalty are usually capped

Lump Sum Operating Rate Day-work Drilling

•   Operator with limited resources depends upon another operator or contractor to supply a
    majority of the required services and materials
•  The service company is compensated on a daily lump sum basis and reimbursed for the
   consumables
•   Feasible for small operators - limited budget
•   Generally, the least common contracting strategy

Footage Drilling

•  Tends to apply over certain sections of a well
•   Win- Win for both operator and drilling contractor if applied correctly
•  Needs to be fully evaluated
•   Operator does lose some control - needs to be evaluated
•  More applicable on long wells with long hole sections

Limited Turnkey Drilling

•   Shared risk agreement between operator and turnkey contractor
•   Operator supplies some third party services
•   Operator supplies required tubulars and other tangible items
•   Turnkey contractor supplies the rig and performs agreed tasks on a lump sum basis
•  Can be good where sporadic wells are planned - operator does not have to over-staff the
    project
•  Good for remote locations or foreign locations (local turnkey contractor = better local
    understanding)

Integrated Project Management

•   Usually includes a large, integrated service company
•   Service company is a primary participant in the well planning and engineering
•   Operator relies on the service contractor to determine material requirements and service
    requirements and provide these items
•   Integrated service company is usually compensated on a daily lump-sum basis plus
    operational charges
•   This strategy allows the operator to shift day to day well operations and logistical planning
    responsibilities to the service contractor.
                            Page 5 of 11                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 23 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

         •   Integrated service provider can hire the third party services

2.6.2 Materials
      Materials typically covers the following types of equipment

      •    Casing
      •    Tubing
      •    Wellheads
      •   Xmas Trees
      •      Drilling Mud
      •    Cement and Additives
      •    Casing Accessories
      •      Drill Bits

2.7  Well Placed On Rig Schedule
     Once the decision to proceed has been received, a preferred spud date is determined, based on
      the amount  of time to complete the detailed well design, lead time  to procure material,
      constraints identified in the Basis of Design or any other constraints that might exist e.g.
     monsoon season, wait on weather issues etc, and the well is placed on the rig schedule.

3.0  Detailed Well Design

     The major steps involved in detailed well design are shown below.


                                                                                    Perform risk
                                                            Prepare and
                                  Prepare detailed                                  assessment /
            Initiate site survey                                   submit AFE for
                                          well design                                         hazard
                                                                 approval
                                                                                                           identification





                                                                 Prepare              Confirm contracts
           Review design           Approve design
                                                                contingency plan           and materials


3.1  Initiate Site Survey
          If a site survey has not been performed then this will be initiated.

      For offshore locations the site survey is used to determine the following information:

      •    Water depth
      •    Seabed conditions (location of debris, anchor holding assessment, etc)
      •     Shallow geology
      •     Presence of shallow gas
      •      Soil strength (jack up leg penetration and conductor load capability)

       In addition, if required, environmental data on wind, wave and currents will also be collated and
       their impact on the well design assessed.

      For onshore locations the site survey is used to determine the following information:

      •       Site location
      •     Road access
      •       Site preparation
      •      Shallow geology
      •     Presence of shallow gas

                                    Page 6 of 11                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 24 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      •      Local hazards (flooding, mud slides, etc)
      •     Weather impact

      For all locations the support requirements are also evaluated at this point and any impact on the
       well design assessed. The following are typical areas that are evaluated:

      •      Transportation of personnel and supplies to the location
      •     Emergency response
      •      Medical facilities
      •      Local infrastructure

3.2  Prepare Detailed Well Design
      Detailed drilling design entails taking the preliminary well design and developing it further to the
       point at which the drilling program can be prepared.

      Detailed well design includes, but is not limited, to a detailed engineering study and design of the
       following areas of the well

      •     Pore and Fracture Pressure Profiles
      •     Temperature Profiles (HPHT wells)
      •     Casing Design
      •     Casing Running and Jewellery
      •      Drilling Fluids
      •     Hydraulics and Hole Cleaning
      •    Cementing Design
      •     Trajectory and Surveying
      •     Torque and Drag
      •       Drill String Design
      •     Well Abandonment
      •     Completion Design
      •     Well Cost and Duration
      •     Contingency Planning

      Obviously the amount of time spent on each area is a function of the complexity of the well being
      planned.

     As a number of these issues are inter-related it is essential that a system of change control be
     used to ensure that the effect of changing a parameter is carried throughout the complete
      design. For example changing mud weight can affect casing design, hydraulics, hole cleaning,
       etc.

3.3  Prepare and Submit AFE
     An Authorisation For Expenditure (AFE) is required for any well construction operation. The AFE
      requires to be signed off by all partners in the well (and in some countries to be approved by
      government), before the well is spudded.

     The AFE provides an estimation of the well duration and cost together with a detailed breakdown
       of the major components that make up the total cost.

     The well duration is an estimate of how long the well will take to drill and complete. The timings
      are normally based on historical well times, often with additional contingency for weather.

     The cost is a combination of the following cost types:

      •     Services
            •  Rig
            •  Mud engineering
            •  Cementing

                                    Page 7 of 11                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 25 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

            •  Directional drilling
            •  Fishing
            •  Wireline logging
            •  Rental tools
            •  Etc.
      •    Consumables
            •  Mud
            •  Cement and additives
            •  Casing and tubing
            •  Welhead and xmas tree
            •   Bits and nozzles
            •  Fuel
      •      Logistics
            •  Helicopters
            •  Supply boats
            •  Transport
            •  Supply base
            •  Telecomms and IT
      •     Support
            •  Supervision
            •  Well planning
            •  Operator overhead

3.4  Perform Risk Analysis
     The hazard assessment performed as part of the preliminary well design is reviewed and
      updated as required based on the detailed design. Any additional hazards  identified are
      recorded and appropriate safeguards developed.

      For any high risk or high consequence activities a risk assessment  will be performed and
     documented. Quantitative techniques may be applied as appropriate.

     The final hazard assessment and any risk analysis is normally reviewed and approved by senior
       well construction management.

     The purpose of performing hazard assessment and risk analysis is as follows:

      •    To ensure that all well construction hazards and their effects on personnel, environment
          and property are identified and assessed.
      •    To ensure that there are adequate safeguards in place to reduce risks to as low as
            reasonably practical (ALARP).

3.5  Peer Review Design
     The detailed design is normally subject to a series of peer reviews at various stages, depending
     upon the well complexity, and will invariably be signed off at a senior management level.

          It is now becoming quite common for rigsite personnel to be involved in some of these peer
      reviews (see later section on Technical Limit).

3.6  Approve Design
     Once any actions evolving from the peer reviews have been closed out, the final well design will
     be approved and signed off.

3.7  Prepare Contingency Plans
      Contingency planning, based on simple what if scenarios, is performed to ensure that:

      •      Sufficient material and equipment is available.
                                    Page 8 of 11                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 26 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      •     Procedures are developed to mitigate the likelihood of the contingency occurring (a large
          number of contingency options are developed from the hazard assessment).
      •     Procedures are developed so  that personnel know what to do  in the event of an
           emergency.
      •    The well design is robust enough to cope with sudden changes of plan.

      Typical “what if” scenarios reviewed are as follows:

      •     Well control event
      •    The pipe gets stuck
      •    The casing won’t run to bottom
      •    Too much angle is being built
      •    The target will be missed
      •     Pore pressure is higher than predicted
      •     Losses occur
      •     Hole instability occurs
      •     Geology is not coming in as prognosed

     The purpose of contingency planning is to ensure that unforeseen events do not result in a
      poorly planned response that results in injury to personnel or damage to the environment or
      equipment.

3.8  Confirm Contracts and Materials
     The drilling engineer ensures that all contracts are in place for all the required services and that
      materials procurement is being carried out according to the final design specifications.

4.0  Prepare Well Program

     The major steps involved in the preparation of the well program are as follows:


            Prepare
                                        Prepare                 Prepare Bridging
         Environmental
                                   Emergency              Document / Safety          Prepare HSE Plan
            Impact
                                 Response Plan             Case Revision
         Assessment




                                                  Submit
              Prepare Drilling
                                             Government                           Drill well on paper
                Program
                                                Consents



4.1  Prepare Environmental Impact Assessment
      Environmental impact assessments are now required for most operations worldwide. Once
     competed they are submitted to government bodies for approval, which can sometimes take
      months, especially if the well is to be drilled in an environmentally sensitive area. This activity is
      often performed in parallel to the detailed well design phase.

4.2  Prepare Emergency Response Plan
     An emergency response plan is required to bridge between the drilling contractors and operators
     emergency response and oil spill contingency plans.

4.3  Prepare Bridging Document
    A bridging document or safety case revision is required to bridge between the rig safety case
     and the operators management system.


                                    Page 9 of 11                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 27 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

4.4  Prepare HSE Plan
    A number of operators require that there is an HSE plan developed for each well or series of
       wells.

4.5  Prepare Drilling Program
      This document essentially provides guidance on how the well is to be drilled, ensuring that any
      constraints in the well design are adhered to. The contents of a typical drilling program are
     shown in Appendix 1.

     The drilling program will be signed off prior to distribution.

4.6  Prepare Consent Documentation
    A number of documents are normally required to be submitted to government agencies prior to
      spudding the well. This is done to gain consent or permission from the government to perform
      various activities. Typical approvals or consents required are:

      •     Consent to Drill
      •     Consent to Move a Rig
      •     Consent to Locate a Rig

4.7  Drill Well On Paper
    A drilling the well on paper exercise is normally held prior to spudding the well. Both office and
        rig site personnel from the operator, drilling contractor and additional service providers attend.
     The exercise has three main objectives.

       1. A dry run of the well, aimed at identifying any problems ahead of time
       2.  Explaining why the well is being drilled the way it is
       3.  Obtaining ideas from the rig site personnel as to performance improvements that could be
        made.

5.0  Execute Well Program

     As the well is being drilled, the progress is monitored and reported, often against a time depth
      curve or other performance measures such as days per 1000 ft, % non productive time, etc.

      Progress is also monitored against the well design parameters and, if required, additional design
       verification is made. For example, if a formation comes in deeper than prognosed, or a leak off
       test is lower than anticipated.

      Although the bulk of these variations should have been addressed in the Contingency Planning,
           it is still necessary to complete an as built design and verify that it meets the various acceptance
        criteria laid down by the Basis of Design, the operating companies internal policies and any
     government legislation.

6.0  Analyse and Improve Performance

     As  the  well   is  drilled  the  performance   is  analysed  and  performance  improvement
     recommendations made. This normally done on a continual basis and is explained in further
       detail in the Technical Limit section later on.





                                   Page 10 of 11                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 28 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

APPENDIX 1

Sample Well / Drilling Program Format


A typical well program should contain the following information. The amount of detail within each
category will obviously vary depending on the well type (conventional, ERD, deepwater, HTHP).

1.  Well Information
    a.     General Information
    b.      Well Objectives
     c.      Geological Prognosis
    d.     Pore and Fracture Pressure Plot
    e.      Well Montage
      f.       Directional Plot
    g.      Risks / Hazards / Potential Problems
    h.     Time Depth Curve
       i.    BOP Configuration
2.   Drilling Procedure
    a.      Rig Move / Pre-Spud
    b.       Individual Hole Section Details
            •  Objective
            •  Potential Problems
            •  Offset Data Summary
            • BHA
            •   Bit and Hydraulics
            •   Drilling Operations / Practices
            •   Drilling Fluids
            •  Casing and Cementing
            •  Wellhead
            •  Contingency Procedures
3.  Directional Drilling and Surveying Program
4.  Wireline Logging Program
5.  Coring Program
6.  Well Testing Program
7.  Completion Program
8.  Abandonment Program
9.  Emergency Procedures
    a.     Weather
    b.      Well Control
     c.      Other
10. Appendices
    a.     Seabed Survey
    b.       Structural Maps
     c.       Bit Records
    d.      Offset Data
    e.      Offset Logs
      f.        Drilling Fluids Program
    g.     Cement Program
    h.      Service Providers and Contact Details
       i.      Hazard and Risk Assessment
11. References and Drawings
    a.      Technical Literature
    b.     Equipment Specifications
     c.    BOP and Wellhead





                                   Page 11 of 11                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 29 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

                  SECTION 3

                CASING DESIGN


     Contents
1.0    Introduction                                                                  3
  1.1   Purpose of Installing Casing                                                   3
     1.1.1   Stove Pipe, Marine Conductor, Foundation Pile                                3
     1.1.2   Conductor String                                                        3
     1.1.3    Surface Casing.                                                         3
     1.1.4    Intermediate Casing                                                      4
     1.1.5    Production Casing                                                       4
     1.1.6    Liners                                                                 4
2.0   Casing Properties                                                             4
  2.1   Outside Diameter and Wall Thickness                                           4
  2.2   Weight per Unit Length                                                       5
  2.3   Grade of Steel                                                              5
  2.4   Type of Connection                                                          5
     2.4.1   API 8-Round, STC or LTC                                                 6
     2.4.2   API BTC                                                               6
     2.4.3    Metal-to-Metal Seal, Threaded & Coupled                                     6
     2.4.4    Metal-to-Metal Seal, Upset & Integral (or Coupled)                              6
     2.4.5    Metal-to-Metal Seal, Formed and Integral (Flush)                               6
     2.4.6   Weld on, Upset and Integral                                                7
  2.5   Length of Joint                                                              7
3.0   The Casing Design Operation                                                    7
4.0    Preliminary Design                                                            7
  4.1   Casing Setting Depth Determination                                             7
  4.2   Kick Tolerance                                                              9
     4.2.1    Kick Intensity                                                           9
     4.2.2    Kick Volume                                                           10
  4.3   Surface and Conductor Setting Depth Design                                     12
5.0    Detailed Design                                                              12
  5.1   Design Load Cases                                                         13
     5.1.1    Installation Loads                                                       13
     5.1.2     Drilling Loads                                                          13
     5.1.3    Production Loads                                                       13
  5.2   Design Factors                                                             13
  5.3   Collapse Design                                                            14
     5.3.1    Collapse Installation Loads                                                14
     5.3.2    Collapse Drilling Loads                                                   16
     5.3.3    Collapse Production Loads                                                17
     5.3.4    Selecting a Casing that Meets the Collapse Loads                             18
     5.3.5    Biaxial Loading                                                         19
     5.3.6    Other Considerations for Collapse Design                                    19
  5.4    Burst Design                                                               19
     5.4.1    Burst Installation Loads                                                  19
     5.4.2    Burst Drilling Loads                                                      21
     5.4.3    Burst Production Loads                                                  22
     5.4.4    Selecting a Casing that Meets the Burst Loads                                23
     5.4.5    Other Considerations for Burst Design                                       24
  5.5    Tensile Design                                                             24
     5.5.1    Tensile Installation Loads                                                 24
     5.5.2    Tensile Drilling and Production Loads                                       26
     5.5.3    Confirming that the Selected Casing Meets the Tensile Loads                    27
  5.6    Triaxial Design                                                             27
6.0   Casing Wear                                                                29
  6.1   Casing Wear Prediction                                                      30
     6.1.1    Contact Pressure and Load                                               30
                                      Page 1 of 35                        Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 30 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

     6.1.2    Well Design                                                            30
     6.1.3   Doglegs                                                               30
  6.2    Control of Casing Wear                                                      30
     6.2.1   Casing Material                                                         30
     6.2.2   Wear Bushing, Crossovers, Centralisers and Cementing                        30
     6.2.3     Drill Pipe Hardbanding                                                   31
     6.2.4    Drillpipe Protectors                                                      31
     6.2.5   Mud Types                                                            31
7.0    Material Selection.                                                            31
  7.1    Strings Exposed to Brines and Mud’s.                                           31
  7.2    Strings Exposed to Reservoir Fluids.                                            32
  7.3   Considerations for Corrosion Resistant Alloys                                    33
     7.3.1    Chlorides and Bromides                                                  33
     7.3.2   Mechanical Properties                                                   33
  7.4   Corrosion Mechanisms                                                      33
8.0   Pore Pressure and Fracture Gradient Prediction                                    34
  8.1   Pore Pressure Prediction                                                     34
  8.2    Fracture Gradient Prediction                                                  35





                                      Page 2 of 35                        Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 31 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

1.0  Introduction

      Casing design is about achieving the total depth of the well safely, with the most cost effective
     number of casing or liner strings.

1.1  Purpose of Installing Casing
       In order to allow the drilling and completing of a well, it is necessary to line the drilled open hole
      with steel pipe / casing. Once in place this pipe is cemented, supporting the casing and sealing
      the annulus in order to:-

      •   Strengthen the hole.
      •   Isolate unstable / flowing / underbalanced / overbalanced formations.
      •   Prevent the contamination of freshwater reservoirs.
      •   Provide a pressure control system.
      •   Confine and contain drilling / completion / produced fluids and solids.
      •   Act as a conduit for associated operations (drilling, wireline, completion and further casing /
          tubing strings) with known dimensions (ID’s etc).
      •   Support wellhead and additional casing strings.
      •   Support the BOP and Xmas tree.

     There are primarily 6 types of casing installed in an onshore / offshore well:
      •   Stove Pipe, Marine Conductor, Foundation Pile.
      •   Conductor String.
      •   Surface Casing.
      •   Intermediate Casing.
      •   Production Casing.
      •   Liners.

1.1.1 Stove Pipe, Marine Conductor, Foundation Pile
     Stove Pipe: is used for onshore locations and is either driven or cemented into a pre-drilled
       hole. The pipe protects the immediate soil at the base of the rig from erosion caused by the
        drilling fluid.

     Marine Conductor: is a feature of offshore drilling operations where the BOP stack is above
      the water.  It provides structural strength and guides drilling and casing strings into the hole. It is
      usually driven or cemented in a pre-drilled hole. The string helps isolate shallow unconsolidated
      formations and protects the base of the structure from erosion by the drilling fluid.

     Foundation Pile: is usually jetted in or cemented into a pre-drilled hole from a floating drilling
       unit – where the BOP stack  is on the sea floor.  Again the string isolates unconsolidated
      formations and supports the guide base for the BOP stack / Xmas tree / flowbase and guides
        drilling and casing strings into the hole.

1.1.2 Conductor String
      This  string  is used to support unconsolidated formations, protect freshwater sands from
      contamination and case off any shallow gas deposits. The string is usually cemented to the
      surface onshore and to the seabed offshore.  This is the first string onto which the BOP is
       installed.   If surface BOP’s are used (i.e. Jack ups) the conductor string also supports the
      wellhead, the Christmas tree and subsequent casing strings.

1.1.3 Surface Casing.
      Provides blow-out protection for deeper drilling, structural support for the wellhead / subsequent
      casing strings, and  is often used to isolate troublesome formations.  The string  is either
     cemented to the surface or to inside the conductor string.



                                      Page 3 of 35                        Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 32 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

1.1.4 Intermediate Casing
      Again  this string provides blowout protection  for deeper  drilling and isolates troublesome
      formations that could impair well safety and  / or hamper drilling operations. An intermediate
      casing string is commonly set when a well is likely to encounter an influx and  / or loss of
       circulation in the open hole thus providing blowout protection by upgrading the strength of the
       well. The cement height is determined by the design requirement to seal off any hydrocarbon /
      flowing salt zones. The top of cement does not need to be inside the surface string.

1.1.5 Production Casing
      This is the name applied to the casing that has the production tubing run within  it and could
       potentially be exposed to reservoir fluids.   It can either extend to the surface as an integral
       string or be a combination of a production liner (7”) and the previously set production casing (9-
       5/8”). The purpose of production casing is to isolate the producing zones, allow for reservoir
       control, act as a conduit for safe transmittal of fluids  / gas  / condensate to the surface and
      prevent the influx of unwanted fluids.

1.1.6 Liners
    A liner will be suspended a short distance above the previous casing shoe and will be cemented
      along its whole length to insure a good seal isolating the annulus. Often a liner top packer can
     be set as a precautionary second barrier. HP / HT wells that incorporate a long liner may only
     cement the shoe and squeeze the liner lap.  Liners permit deeper drilling, separate productive
     zones from reservoir formations and can thus be installed for testing purposes.

       Drilling liners are set:
      •   to provide a deeper shoe
      •   isolate unstable formations
      •   to achieve a drilling casing at a reduced cost
      •  due to rig limitations

      Production liners are set:
      •   to complete the well at a reduced cost.
      •   allow for a larger production conduit providing a range of choice for the tubing.
      •  due to rig limitations.


2.0  Casing Properties

     Casing is usually specified by the following properties
      •   Outside diameter and wall thickness
      •   Weight per unit length
      •  Grade of steel
      •  Type of connection
      •   Length of joint

2.1  Outside Diameter and Wall Thickness
     The outside diameter refers to the pipe body and not to the coupling. Coupling diameter is
      important as it determines the minimum hole size that the casing can be run into.

      Wall thickness determines the inside diameter of the pipe and hence the maximum bit size that
     can be run through the pipe.

     The permitted tolerance on outside diameter and wall thickness is given in API Spec 5A. As a
      general rule:

     Casing outside diameter >= 4½”         Tolerance ± 0.75%
     Casing outside diameter < 4½”         Tolerance ± 0.031%
      Wall Thickness                        Tolerance – 12.5%

                                      Page 4 of 35                        Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 33 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


2.2  Weight per Unit Length
     The nominal weight of casing is used primarily to identify casing during ordering. Nominal
      weights are not exact and are based on the calculated theoretical weight of a 20 foot length of
      threaded and coupled pipe.

2.3  Grade of Steel
     The  mechanical and  physical  properties  of  casing  are dependent upon  the  chemical
      composition of the steel and the heat treatment it receives during manufacture.

     API defines nine grades of steel for casing.

     H40     J55   K55   C75   L80   N80   C95   P110  Q125

     The number in the designation gives the API minimum yield strength in thousands of psi. Hence
     L80 casing has a yield strength of 80,000 psi.

     The letter in the designation gives an indication of the type of steel and the treatment it received
      during manufacture.

    A more detailed section on Material Selection can be found later.

2.4  Type of Connection
     There are a host of available connection types available on the market today. Selection of a
       suitable connection should be based upon the intended application, the required performance
     and cost.

     The table below can act as a rough guide as whether API or Premium threads should be used.

     Production Tubing

              Liquids          API            <5000          Premium
                            Threads          psi>             Threads
          Gas            API            <3500          Premium
                            Threads          psi>             Threads

     Production Casing

              Liquids          API            <7500          Premium
                            Threads          psi>             Threads
          Gas            API            <5000          Premium
                            Threads          psi>             Threads

     Surface and Intermediate Casing
          If the pressure differential across the connection  is ≥ 7,500 psi a premium thread  is the
      preferred option. An API thread with an enhanced coupling design can be used although its
      sealing qualities are not as reliable. Leak resistance values for API connections can be found in
     API bulletin 5C2.

     Connection Properties
     The connection collapse, burst and tensile properties should be compared with the pipe body
       properties. Whichever are the lowest should be used in all casing design connections.

       In addition some connections have a very low capacity in compression when compared to their
       tensile  strengths.  If compression or compression  / bending  is a  critical  load, query the
      manufacturer on their coupling capacity under these conditions (i.e. Vam SC has only 25% cap
       in compression versus tension)


                                      Page 5 of 35                        Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 34 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      Six generic connection types are  available. These are shown below with some general
       characteristics.

2.4.1 API 8-Round, STC or LTC
      •  Good availability and price
      •   Liquid sealability up to about 210ºF
      •   Sealing is a combination of connection geometry and thread dope
      •   Poor gas tightness
      •  Gauges and expertise are widely available for re-work and refurbishment
      •   Prone to galling and cross-threading due to out of roundness, especially in larger OD's
      •   High assembly circumferential (hoop) stress in coupling
      •   Tensile efficiency 70-75% depending on thread type
      •  Leak resistance must be verified per API Bulletin 5C3

2.4.2 API BTC
      •  Good availability and price.
      •   Poor gas tightness
      •   Liquid sealability up to about 210ºF
      •   Sealing is a combination of connection geometry and thread dope
      •   Tin plating improves leak resistance
      •  Gauges and expertise are widely available for re-work and refurbishment
      •   Prone to galling and to cross-threading due to out of roundness, especially in larger OD's
      •   High assembly circumferential (hoop) stress in coupling
      •   Tensile efficiency is generally 85 - 95% of pipe body
      •  Leak resistance of BTC must be verified per API Bulletin 5C3

2.4.3 Metal-to-Metal Seal, Threaded & Coupled
      •       Availability to depend on propriety type, e.g., Vam, Fox, NS-CC etc.
      •     Good gas tightness, generally.
      •      Special clearance couplings manufactured from some or higher grade material are
              available to improve hole clearance.
      •      Susceptible to handling damage  if not treated with care. Pins must be bored concentric
               to seals for effective gas sealing.
      •       Particularly suited to use on cold worked high alloys that cannot be upset.
      •      Generally good make-up characteristics due to reduced thread interference compared to
           API connections.
      •     Gauges and expertise are available, depending on type, for re-work and refurbishment
           and can readily be re-cut.
      •     Assembly circumferential (hoop) stress in coupling can be controlled by reduced thread
              interference since sealing in the thread is not a requirement.
      •      Tensile efficiency is generally at least equal to BTC and in many instances equal to or
            exceeds pipe body.

2.4.4 Metal-to-Metal Seal, Upset & Integral (or Coupled)
      •     Poor availability of couplings and limited upset re-cuts for pipe refurbishment.
      •       Costly, especially upsetting.
      •     Good gas tightness.
      •      Usually exhibiting very good repeated make/break capabilities.
      •      Susceptible to handling damage if not treated with care.
      •      Pins must be bored concentric to seals for effective gas sealing.
      •      Tensile efficiency at least equal to or greater than pipe body.

2.4.5 Metal-to-Metal Seal, Formed and Integral (Flush)
      •   Hole clearance characteristics excellent, flush pipe OD

                                      Page 6 of 35                        Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 35 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      •   Reasonable availability, easy to refurbish/recut, no requirement for couplings.
      •  Good gas tightness.
      •   Pins must be bored concentric to seals for effective gas sealing.
      •   Tensile efficiency = 50 - 75% of pipe body depending on type of connections.
      •   Connections may be weaker than the pipe body for internal pressure rating.

2.4.6 Weld on, Upset and Integral
      •   Very costly (connector, weld and NDT).
      •   Elimination of mill end with weld on box.
      •  Coarse threads to resist cross threading or galling.
      •   Continuous threaded product resists disengagement under severe bending.
      •  Grades limited to weldable (linepipe) or H-40, K/J-55.
      •   Tensile efficiency generally greater than pipe body.

2.5  Length of Joint
     Casing joints are not manufactured in exact lengths. API has specified three ranges in which
      pipe lengths must lie.

        Range         Length (ft)      Average Length (ft)
           1            16 – 25              22
           2            25 – 34              31
           3            > 34               42

3.0  The Casing Design Operation

     There are two phases of casing design.
       1.  The first takes place during the Preliminary Well Design and involves the casing scheme
           selection and casing setting depth determination.
       2.  The second takes place during the Detailed Well Design and involves a determination of the
          loads that the casing will be exposed to during the  life of the well and the selection of
          tubulars with suitable mechanical and physical properties that can withstand the predicted
          loads.

4.0  Preliminary Design

4.1  Casing Setting Depth Determination
     The initial selection of casing setting depths is based on the anticipated pore pressure and
       fracture gradients. The drilling engineer is responsible for ensuring that, as far as possible, all
      the relevant offset data has been considered in the estimation of pore pressure and fracture
      gradients, and that, for directional wells, the effect of hole angle on offset fracture gradient data
     has been considered.

     The total depth of the well, and hence the setting depth of the production casing or liner, is
      driven by logging, testing, and completion requirements. The shoe must be set deep enough to
      give an adequate sump for logging, perforating, and test on production activities.

     The  initial estimate of determining casing setting depths is best determined graphically, as
       follows, plotting pore pressure and fracture gradient, expressed in equivalent density, against
      depth.

       1.  Draw the mean pore pressure gradient curve along with lithology,  if available. Note any
           intervals which are potential problem areas such as differential sticking, loss circulation or
          high pressure gas zones.
       2.  Draw the mud weight curve. The mud weight curve should include a trip margin of around
        200 to 400 psi.



                                      Page 7 of 35                        Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 36 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
               DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

3.  Draw the predicted fracture gradient curve. Draw a fracture gradient design curve, which
    parallels the predicted fracture gradient curve with a reduction of 0.3 to 0.5 ppg for kicks
   and ECD during cementing.
4.  Plot offset mud weights and LOT's to provide a check of the pore pressure predictions or
    highlight the need for further investigation.


A typical plot is attached. The initial casing setting depths can be determined as follows.


                                                                       Casing

                                                           Conductor



            Mud Weight                                          Surface                Pressure        Curve
            Normal

                                                                       Intermediate


                                              Base Fracture Gradient
              E                 D        Design Curve
                                                                     (inc. 3ppg Kick &
  Depth                                              Cementing Margin)           Pore Pressure                                                                         Production
            Gradient

                                 C

                                          B



                                                                           Production
                                                                                Liner

                                             A

                                        Equivalent Mud Weights


1.  Working from the bottom up enter the mud weight curve at Point A.
2.  Move up to Point B which determines the initial estimated setting depth for the production
    casing.
3.  Move across to Point C, which identifies the mud weight requirement for that depth.
4.  Move up to Point D which determines the initial estimated setting depth for the intermediate
    casing.
5.  Move across to Point E to identify the mud weight required at that depth. For the example
   shown, Point E is the normal pressure range and no further casing is required to withstand
    the associated mud weight. However, a conductor and surface casing are required and the
    setting depth for these casings is discussed later.

Other factors that may impact casing depth selection in addition to pore pressure and fracture
pressures are:

•   Shallow gas zones.
•   Lost circulation zones.
•   Formation stability which is sensitive to exposure time or mud weight.




                                Page 8 of 35                        Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 37 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      •   Directional well profile. It is important to line out the well trajectory before setting casing and
          attempt to achieve a consistent survey ahead of a tangent section. Also, long, open hole
          sections may require casing to reduce the occurrence of stuck pipe and the level of torque.
      •   Sidetracking requirements as specified in the Basis of Design e.g. 13-3/8” casing might be
           set high to allow 9-5/8” casing to be cut and pulled for a sidetrack in 12-1/4” hole.
      •   Fresh water sands (drinking water).
      •   Hole cleaning, particularly if a long section of 17½" hole is required.
      •   Salt sections.
      •   High pressure zones.
      •   Lithology  - casing shoes should, where practicable, be set in competent impermeable
          formations.
      •   Uncertainty in depth estimating due to seismic uncertainty.

        All  of the above need  to be considered and the  initial casing  setting depths adjusted
      accordingly.

4.2  Kick Tolerance
     Once the initial casing setting depths have been selected, the kick tolerance associated with
      those depths should be calculated. Starting from TD up to surface the kick tolerance and
      preferred setting depth for each casing string should be calculated.

      Kick tolerance is the maximum kick size that can be taken into the wellbore and circulated to the
     shoe without breaking down the formation. It is dependent on the mud weight in use, the open
      hole weak point (normally assumed to be the previous casing shoe), the formation pressure the
      size and density of the influx and the hole geometry.

     There are two methods for calculating kick tolerance. The first calculates a kick intensity and the
     second a kick volume.

     Note that both methods neglect any temperature effects and assume an ideal gas.

4.2.1 Kick Intensity
      Kick intensity (as shown in the Well Control Manual) is a measure of how much the mud weight
     can be raised for a given kick volume. In other words if you drill into an overpressured zone by
     how much can you raise the mud and still circulate out the kick.

      For casing design purposes the kick volume is assumed to be 25 bbls and the minimum
      acceptable kick intensity is 0.5 ppg.    If the kick intensity is below this value, then further
      approval should be sought.

      Kick intensity is calculated using the following equation.

      KI      = MAASP – (MW x 0.052 x Hi)  (ppg)
                    0.052 x TVD

     Where:
      KI      = kick intensity (ppg)
    MAASP = maximum allowable annular surface pressure (psi)
   MW    = mud weight in the hole (ppg)
      Hi      = height of influx (ft)
    TVD    = true vertical depth of well (ft)

     Example
     12¼” hole TD          13,123 ft
    BHA                 697 ft x 8” DC
    DP                       5”
    Mud weight             13.2 ppg
      Previous casing shoe    8,842 ft
    LOT at shoe            14.3 ppg EMW
                                      Page 9 of 35                        Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 38 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

    MAASP = 8,842 ft x (14.3 ppg – 13.2 ppg) x 0.052
            = 506 psi
      Hi      = 25 bbls / [(12.252 – 82) x 0.0009714]
            = 300 ft

      (Note that this is the height of the influx around the  drill collars, as this volume passes up
     around the drill pipe the height will reduce due to a larger annular capacity between DP and
     open hole)

      KI      = [506 psi – (13.2 ppg x 0.052 x 300 ft)] / (0.052 x 13,123 ft)
            = 0.44 ppg

4.2.2 Kick Volume
     The kick volume determines the maximum kick size that can be taken into the wellbore and
       circulated to the shoe.

     The following process can be used to calculate kick volume.

       1.   Estimate the safety margin to be applied to the leakoff pressure at the open hole
        weak point

    When the influx is displaced from the hole, there will be additional pressures acting in the
      wellbore. The following are possible causes of such additional pressure during circulation:

      •     Annulus friction
      •     Choke operator error
      •     Choke line losses (if not compensated for)

     The total safety margin to be applied to the leakoff pressure will be the sum of these additional
      pressures. The maximum allowable static weak point pressure can therefore be determined.
      (This is the maximum allowable weak point pressure before circulation is initiated.)

     The Drilling Engineer must use his/her judgement to determine the most appropriate safety
       factor to be applied to the leakoff pressure at the open hole weak point.  This safety factor
      should be based on operating area experience.

       2. Calculate the maximum allowable static weak point pressure (Pmax).
       The maximum allowable pressure is given by:

         Pmax = Plo – (safety margin) (psi)

        Where:
         Pmax  = maximum allowable weak point pressure (psi)
           Plo   = leakoff pressure at the open hole weak point (psi)

       3. Calculate the maximum allowable height of influx in the open hole section
       The maximum height of influx that can be taken in the open hole without exceeding Pmax at
      Dwp is given by:

      H =  Pmax – Pf + (TD – Dwp) MW 0.052         (ft)
                    0.052MW - gg

        Where:
      H    = height of influx (ft)
         Pmax  = maximum allowable pressure at the open hole weak point (psi)
     MW  = mud weight in the hole (ppg)
        gg   = gas gradient psi/ft
      TD   = bit depth (ft)
         Pf   = formation pressure at TD psi
      Dwp = depth of shoe or weak point

                                     Page 10 of 35                        Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 39 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
               DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


4. Calculate the volume that this height corresponds to at initial shut-in conditions
   At initial shut-in conditions, this can be converted to an influx volume as follows:

   V1 = H x C1 (bbl)

   Where:
  V1   = kick tolerance for initial influx (bbl)
  C1   = annular capacity at the BHA (bbl/ft)

  C1 must be determined bearing in mind the hole dimensions in relation to the height of the
    influx, H. For example,  if H is greater than the height of the BHA, both the capacity of the
    drillpipe /open hole annulus and the drill collar/open hole annulus must be used to calculate
   the kick tolerance, V.

5. Calculate the volume that this height corresponds to when the top of the influx has
  been circulated to the open hole weak point
   This height corresponds to a volume at the open hole weak point given by:

   Vwp = H x C2 (bbl)

   Where:
  C2   = annular capacity below the open hole weak point (bbl/ft)

  C2 must be determined bearing in mind the hole dimensions immediately below the open
   hole weak point in relation to the height of the influx, H.

6. Calculate what Vwp (as calculated in (5)) would be at initial shut-in conditions
   Using Boyle’s Law to convert this volume to its original volume at initial shut-in conditions
    (V2):

  P1 x V1 = P2 x V2 or in this case:

   Pf x V2 = Pmax x Vwp

   V2 = Pmax x Vwp
          Pf

7. The kick tolerance is the lower of V1 and V2

  As a general rule, a kick tolerance of less than 100bbl should be justified by a review of type
   of well, rig equipment for kick detection and operator/driller's experience, area experience
   and geology.
   The proposed kick tolerance  for casing seat design should be noted  for each casing,
   approved by the Drilling Superintendent, and recorded on the drilling program.

   Sensitivity studies should be considered to identify the contingency provisions required to
   accommodate pore or fracture pressures during drilling which differ from those assumed
   during design.

   Software is available to calculate kick tolerance and is available as a spreadsheet from the
   Well Construction website on the TSF intranet.

   Example
   12¼” hole TD        13,123 ft
  BHA              697 ft x 8” DC
  DP                   5”
  Mud weight          13.2 ppg
   Previous casing shoe 8,842 ft
  LOT at shoe         14.3 ppg EMW


                                Page 11 of 35                        Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 40 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

       1.  Assume a 150 psi safety margin
       2.  Pmax = (14.3 ppg x 8,842 ft x 0.052) – 150 psi
            = 6,424 psi

       3.  Pf   = 13,123 ft x 13.2 ppg x 0.052

            = 9,008 psi

         Note that this assumes the well is on balance

      H   = 6,424 psi – 9,008 psi + [(13,123 ft – 8,842 ft) x 13.2 ppg x 0.052]

                                  (0.052 x 13.2) – 0.1

            = 604 ft
       4.  V1  = 604 ft x [(12.252 – 82) x 0.0009714]
            = 50.5 bbls
       5.  Vwp  = 604 ft x [(12.252 – 52) x 0.0009714]
            = 73.4 bbls
       6.  V2  = 6,424 psi x 73.4 bbls / 9,008 psi

            = 52.3 bbls

       7.  Kick volume, in this case, is V1 = 50.5 bbls


4.3  Surface and Conductor Setting Depth Design
     The minimum setting depth for surface and conductor casings is the depth at which the bottom
      hole pressure created by the circulating drilling fluid (ECD) is exceeded by the fracture value of
      the formation.

     The ECD can be significantly affected in large diameter holes by high ROP and poor hole
      cleaning.

     Water depth can play a significant part and results in the depth that the ECD is exceeded by the
       fracture value being pushed that much deeper and can result in additional casing strings being
       run.

       In deepwater areas bending and axial loading are primary considerations in the design of the
      conductor casing. Due to the complexity of the interaction of the various parameters that affect
      bending and axial loading a computer program is needed to accurately model the loads and the
      behaviour of the conductor.

       In addition the load bearing capacity (which directly relates to the soil strength below the
      mudline) must be determined.

5.0  Detailed Design

     The detailed design stage is about determining the loads each casing string will be exposed to
      during the life of the well and the selection of tubulars with suitable mechanical and physical
      properties that can withstand the predicted loads.

     The major steps in detailed design for each casing string are shown below.





                                     Page 12 of 35                        Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 41 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE




                                Determine Burst
       Define Load                                                Define Initial               Determine Tensile
                               and Collapse
        Cases                                               Casing String                  Loads
                                   Loads





               Adjust Initial               Determine Triaxial                Finalise Casing
            Casing String             Loads (if required)                     String

5.1  Design Load Cases
     The anticipated design load cases should be calculated in the order in which they occur. This
      helps identify all the loads to which a casing string may be exposed.

     Note that not all of these load cases will be applicable to every casing string. For example
      production loads do not have to be considered  for an intermediate casing  string on an
      exploration well.

5.1.1 Installation Loads
      Typical installation loads include
      •   Casing running
      •  Cementing
          •   Conventional cementing, stab-in, etc.
          •   Plug bump


5.1.2 Drilling Loads
      Typical drilling loads include
      •   Pressure testing after waiting on cement
      •  Maximum mud weight
      •   Well control
      •   Lost circulation


5.1.3 Production Loads
      Typical production loads include
      •   Pressure testing with completion or kill weight fluid
      •   Functioning DST tools
      •  Near surface tubing leak
      •   Collapse due to plugged perforations
      •   Special production operations (stimulation, gas lift, injection)


5.2  Design Factors
     To account  for factors that are improperly addressed or not  directly accounted  for, the
      properties of the casing are downrated by a design factor before being compared with the
      calculated design loads.

      Typical design factors used are as follows
               Collapse       1.0
               Burst          1.1
              Tension        1.3
                  Triaxial        1.25


                                     Page 13 of 35                        Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 42 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      Local legislation should be checked to ensure that other more stringent design factors are not
       stipulated.


5.3  Collapse Design
      For all casing strings a collapse load occurs when the external pressure is greater than the
       internal pressure.

      Collapse design focuses on the internal and external pressure profiles.

      Generally speaking the collapse load will be highest at the casing shoe.

5.3.1 Collapse Installation Loads
     The worst case collapse load during installation occurs during cementing.

      For conventional cement jobs the worst case occurs with the cement column on the outside of
      the casing.

     Example
       9-5/8” Production Casing set at 11,450 ft
    Mud Weight 11 ppg
     Top of Cement at 7,000 ft
     Cement Weight 16 ppg
     Top of Spacer at 5,500 ft
     Spacer Weight 13 ppg

       Internal Pressure Profile
               At surface           = 0 psi
               At casing shoe       = 11,450 ft x 11 ppg x 0.052
                              = 6,549 psi
      External Pressure Profile
               At surface           = 0 psi
               At top of spacer      = 5,500 ft x 11 ppg x 0.052
                              = 3,146 psi
               At top of cement      = 3,146 psi + [(7,000 ft – 5,000 ft) x 13 ppg x 0.052]
                              = 4,160 psi
               At casing shoe       = 4,160 psi + [(11,450 ft – 7,000 ft) x 16 ppg x 0.052]
                              = 7,862 psi
     Net collapse load at casing shoe = 7,862 psi – 6,549 psi
                              = 1,313 psi

     The net collapse load is best represented graphically, as shown below, by plotting the internal
     and external pressure profiles and the net collapse load.

      For stab-in cement jobs the possibility of bridging needs to be taken into account. If bridging
      occurs then the external hydrostatic pressure will be increased by the circulating pressure, with
     a subsequent increase in the net collapse load.





                                     Page 14 of 35                        Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 43 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
               DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE





                                                                                                            Internal Hydrostatic


                                              2,000
      Mud



                    Mud                     4,000


                                            ft
                                                                                                               (TVD)
                                              6,000
       Spacer                                                                                 Depth

      TOC
                                              8,000
                                                                                                                                                      External Hydrostatic


       Cement                                 10,000


                                                                            Net Collapse Load

                                             12,000

       Casing
       Shoe                                                   1,000      2,000    3,000     4,000    5,000     6,000     7,000    8,000


                                                                                                        Pressure (psi)


                 Collapse - Installation



Example
20” Surface Casing set at 1,500 ft
Mud Weight 9.5 ppg
Cement to surface
Cement Weight 16 ppg
Bridge occurs with 1000 psi surface pressure

Internal Pressure Profile
         At surface           = 0 psi
         At casing shoe       = 1,500 ft x 9.5 ppg x 0.052
                          = 741 psi
External Pressure Profile
         At surface           = 1,000 psi
         At casing shoe       = 1,000 psi + (1,500 ft x 16 ppg x 0.052)
                          = 2,248 psi
Net collapse load at casing shoe = 2,248 psi – 741 psi
                          = 1,507 psi





                                Page 15 of 35                        Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 44 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE





                                                                                                                            Internal Pressure




                       Mud


                                                          500                                      External Pressure


                                                                ft
                                                                                                                                                                (TVD)

                                 Inner                                                                                                                                                                Depth
                                   String

                                                          1000


                                                                                                                 Net Collapse Load

                          Cement



                                                          1500

                             Stab                                        In                                                 1,000      2,000    3,000     4,000    5,000     6,000
                          Shoe


                                                                                                                               Pressure (psi)


                                  Collapse - Installation (stab-in)





5.3.2 Collapse Drilling Loads
     The worst case collapse load during drilling occurs  if lost circulation is encountered and the
       internal hydrostatic pressure decreases.

     By convention, the external fluid is deemed to be the mud that was in place when the casing
     was run. This is due to the uncertainty of complete cement isolation around the casing caused
     by channelling or washouts.

     The level that the internal  fluid drops to can be anything from hundreds of feet to  total
      evacuation of the casing and depends upon the internal mud weight in use and the pore
      pressure of the loss zone.

     Example
      13-3/8” Intermediate Casing set at 9,750 ft
      External Mud Weight 11 ppg
       Internal Mud Weight 11.2 ppg
       Drilling ahead 12-1/4” hole at 13,360 ft.
      Experienced total losses and fluid level dropped to 2,528 ft

       Internal Pressure Profile
               At surface           = 0 psi
               At 2,528 ft          = 0 psi
               At casing shoe       = (9,750 ft – 2,528 ft) x 11.2 ppg x 0.052
                              = 4,206 psi
      External Pressure Profile
               At surface           = 0 psi
               At casing shoe       = 9,750 ft x 11 ppg x 0.052
                              = 5,577 psi
     Net collapse load at casing shoe = 5,577 psi – 4,206 psi
                              = 1,371 psi



                                     Page 16 of 35                        Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 45 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE





                                Fluid                                   2,000
                             Level


                                                              4,000


                                                              ft
                                                                                                                                                          (TVD)
                                                              6,000
                                        Drill                                                                                                                                                   External Pressure                                String                                                                                  Depth

                                                              8,000


                                                             10,000                                    Internal Pressure
                                                                                   Net Collapse Load


                                                             12,000

                          Casing
                       Shoe                                                   1,000      2,000    3,000     4,000    5,000     6,000


                                                                                                                           Pressure (psi)




                                                  Collapse - Drilling



5.3.3 Collapse Production Loads
      Collapse loads that production casing and liners will be exposed to need to be considered for
      the entire life of the well. This depends upon what the well will be used for but consideration
      should be given to the following as applicable:

      •  DST operations
      •   Stimulation techniques
      •  Gas Lift
      •  Drawdown

     By convention, the external fluid is deemed to be the mud that was in place when the casing
     was run. After a period of time (typically one year) this can be relaxed as follows:

              Position In Well                                   External Fluid
           Uncemented Casing / Casing Annulus         Mud that casing was run in
           Cemented Casing / Casing Annulus           Mud that casing was run in
           Cemented Casing / Open Hole Annulus          Pore Pressure

     The internal hydrostatic pressure  will vary, depending upon the position of the production
      packer and the collapse considerations should be separated into above the packer or below the
      packer.

     Example
       9-5/8” Production Casing set at 15,700 ft
      Production Packer set at 12,000 ft
      Completion Fluid Weight 9.2 ppg
    Mud Weight behind casing 11 ppg
     Gas Gradient 0.1 psi / ft
      Perforations have plugged and the well has been drawn down to 0 psi at surface

     Above Packer
       Internal Pressure Profile
               At surface           = 0 psi
               At packer           = 12,000 ft x 9.2 ppg x 0.052
                              = 5,741 psi



                                     Page 17 of 35                        Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 46 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      External Pressure Profile
               At surface           = 0 psi
               At packer           = 12,000 ft x 11 ppg x 0.052
                              = 6,864 psi
     Net collapse load at packer     = 6,864 psi – 5,741 psi
                              = 1,123 psi

     Below Packer
       Internal Pressure Profile
               At packer           = 12,000 ft x 0.1 psi/ft
                              = 1,200 psi
               At casing shoe       = 15,700 ft x 0.1 psi/ft
                              = 1,570 psi
        External Pressure Profile
               At packer           = 12,000 ft x 11 ppg x 0.052
                              = 6,864 psi
               At casing shoe       = 15,700 ft x 11 ppg x 0.052
                              = 8,980 psi
     Net collapse load at packer     = 6,864 psi – 1,200 psi
                              = 5,664 psi
     Net collapse load at casing shoe = 8,890 psi – 1,570 psi
                              = 7,320 psi





                                                        2,000


              Tubing                                   4,000                                     Internal Pressure
                                                                                         (above Packer)


                                                        6,000


                                                       ft  8,000
                                                                                                                                          (TVD)
             Completion                                                                          Depth                                                                       External Pressure
                Fluid                                    10,000

             Packer                                                               Net Collapse Load

                                                      12,000



                                                      14,000
           Gas                                                       Internal Pressure
                                                                 (below Packer)

                                                      16,000

                                                                      1,000      2,000    3,000     4,000    5,000     6,000     7,000    8,000    9,000

                     Collapse - Production                                                           Pressure (psi)


5.3.4 Selecting a Casing that Meets the Collapse Loads
     From the net collapse loads generated by looking at the various  installation,  drilling and
      production load cases, the worst case collapse load that the casing will have to tolerate can be
      determined.

     From casing tables  it is then possible to choose a casing or series of casings that match the
      worst case collapse load. This stage is often ignored until the burst loads have been calculated.
     The casing collapse figures that are quoted in most casing tables are generated from a series of
      equations detailed in API Bulletin 5C3 and are a function of the casing OD, the wall thickness
     and the casing yield strength.




                                     Page 18 of 35                        Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 47 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

5.3.5 Biaxial Loading
     The collapse figures determined using API Bulletin 5C3 are for casings that are under zero axial
       load. In practice, due to the weight of the casing or to the combined action of internal and
      external pressures, it is rare for casing to be under zero axial load.

     The effect of axial load is to decrease the collapse strength of casing.

      For casing design purposes, unless the collapse strength is critical, the reduction in collapse
      strength due to axial load is normally ignored.

5.3.6 Other Considerations for Collapse Design
      Casing Wear
          If casing wear is anticipated to be an issue (i.e. high sidewall forces, extended drillstring to
      casing contact, localised doglegs, abrasive or damaged hardbanding in use, etc.) then this
     needs to be accounted for.

     As the collapse strength of casing is related to the wall thickness, then if casing wear estimates
       that 20% of the wall thickness will be worn away during drilling, then the residual collapse
      strength of the casing will be 80% of that of new casing.

     More detail on casing wear can be found later.

5.4  Burst Design
      For all casing strings a burst load occurs when the internal pressure is greater than the external
      pressure.

     As with collapse, burst design focuses on the internal and external fluids and the hydrostatic
      pressures that they exert.

5.4.1 Burst Installation Loads
     The worst case burst load during installation occurs during cementing.

     Two cases need to be considered here.
      •   During the displacement immediately prior to the spacer exiting the shoe
      •  Bumping the plug

     Example – Cement Displacement
      13-3/8” Intermediate Casing set at 9,750 ft
    Mud Weight 11 ppg
      5,000 ft of 16 ppg cement
      2,000 ft of 13 ppg spacer

       Internal Pressure Profile
               At surface           = 0 psi
               At top of cement      = (9,750 ft – 7,000 ft) x 11 ppg x 0.052
                              = 1,573 psi
               At top of spacer      = 1,573 + (5,000 ft x 16 x 0.052)
                              = 5,733 psi
               At casing shoe       = 5,733 psi + (2,000 ft x 13 ppg x 0.052)
                              = 7,085 psi
      External Pressure Profile
               At surface           = 0 psi
               At casing shoe       = 9,750 ft x 11 ppg x 0.052
                              = 5,577 psi
     Net burst load at surface       = 0 psi
     Net burst load at casing shoe   = 7,085 psi – 5,577 psi
                              = 1,508 psi

                                     Page 19 of 35                        Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 48 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
               DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

The net burst load is best represented graphically, as shown below, by plotting the internal and
external pressure profiles and the net collapse load.





   Mud

                                        2,000



                                      ft
                                                                                              (TVD)
                                        4,000
                                                                                              Depth                                                                           Internal Pressure
    Cement

                                        6,000



                                                                       Net Burst Load
                                        8,000


                                                                                                        External Pressure
     Spacer
                                       10,000

                                                       1,000      2,000    3,000     4,000    5,000     6,000     7,000    8,000    9,000
    Casing
    Shoe
                                                                                                Pressure (psi)



                Burst - Installation - Cement Displacement




Example – Plug Bump
13-3/8” Intermediate Casing set at 9,750 ft
Mud Weight 11 ppg
Top of Spacer at 1,750 ft
Spacer Weight 13 ppg
Top of Cement at 3,000 ft
Cement Weight 16 ppg
Plug Bump Pressure 2,500 psi

Internal Pressure Profile
         At surface           = 2,500 psi
         At casing shoe       = 2,500 psi + (9,750 ft x 11 ppg x 0.052)
                          = 8,077 psi
External Pressure Profile
         At surface           = 0 psi
         At top of spacer      = 1,750 ft x 11 ppg x 0.052
                          = 1,001 psi
         At top of cement      = 1,001 psi + [(3,000 ft – 1,750 ft) x 13 ppg x 0.052]
                          = 1,846 psi
         At casing shoe       = 1,846 psi + [(9,750 ft – 3,000 ft) x 16 ppg x 0.052
                          = 7,462 psi
Net burst load at surface       = 2,500 psi
Net burst load at casing shoe   = 8,077 psi – 7,462 psi
                          = 615 psi





                                Page 20 of 35                        Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 49 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE





                                     2,500 psi





               Mud





                                                                                                                                                        Internal Pressure
                  Spacer          Mud                     2,000


                                                      ft
                                                                                                                                        (TVD)
                                                        4,000
                                                                                                                                        Depth


                                                        6,000


                Cement                                  8,000                      Net Burst Load                  External Pressure


                                                       10,000

                  Casing
                Shoe                                                   1,000      2,000    3,000     4,000    5,000     6,000     7,000    8,000


                                                                                                                    Pressure (psi)


                          Burst - Installation - Plug Bump





5.4.2 Burst Drilling Loads
     The worst case burst drilling loads occur either during pressure testing or during a well control
      event.

     Example – Pressure Test
      13-3/8” Intermediate Casing set at 9,750 ft
    Mud Weight 11.5 ppg
     Top of Cement at 3,000 ft
      Previous Casing Shoe at 1,500 ft
      Normally Pressured
      Pressure Test 3,000 psi

       Internal Pressure Profile
               At surface           = 3,000 psi
               At casing shoe       = 3,000 psi + (9,750 ft x 11.5 ppg x 0.052)
                              = 8,831 psi
      External Pressure Profile
               At surface           = 0 psi
               At top of cement      = 3,000 ft x 8.33 ppg x 0.052
                              = 1,299 psi
               At casing shoe       = 1,299 psi + [(9,750 ft – 3,000 ft) x 8.6 ppg x 0.052
                              = 4,318 psi
     Net burst load at surface       = 3,000 psi
     Net burst load at casing shoe   = 8,831 psi – 4,318 psi
                              = 4,513 psi

     NOTE: The external pressure profile after cement has set is a matter of great debate, and
      requires careful consideration.





                                     Page 21 of 35                        Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 50 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

       In the example above it has been assumed that for casing in contact with formation via cement
      the external pressure is equal to the expected pore pressure. For casing exposed to formation
       via an uncemented section (top of cement below previous casing shoe) the external pressure is
      equal to a column of mud mix fluid with zero surface pressure (i.e. the mud has wholly settled
      out – in the above example a water based mud was assumed).





                   3,000 psi





 Mud


  Top of
  Cement

                Mud                     2,000                                                                              Internal Pressure


                                      ft
                                                                                                (TVD)
                                          4,000
                                                                                                Depth


                                          6,000

                                                                                 External Pressure

                                          8,000                                                    Net Burst Load



                                         10,000

 Casing
 Shoe                                                    1,000      2,000    3,000     4,000     5,000     6,000     7,000    8,000     9,000


                                                                                                Pressure (psi)

             Burst - Drilling

5.4.3 Burst Production Loads
      Burst loads that need to be considered during production include pressure testing with a
      completion or kill weight fluid, a near surface tubing leak.

     The internal load is the hydrostatic pressure of the fluid plus any applied pressure.

     The external load will be as for the Burst Drilling Load.

     Example – Near Surface Tubing Leak
       9-5/8” Production Casing set at 15,700 ft
      Production Packer set at 12,000 ft
      Completion Fluid Weight 9.2 ppg
    Mud Weight behind casing 11 ppg
     Gas Gradient 0.1 psi / ft
     Top of cement 8,000 ft
     Pore pressure 9.0 ppg EMW
     SITHP 5,778 psi

     Above Packer
       Internal Pressure Profile
               At surface           = 5,778 psi
               At packer           = 5,778 psi + (12,000 ft x 9.2 ppg x 0.052)
                              = 11,519 psi
      External Pressure Profile
               At surface           = 0 psi
               At TOC             = 8,000 ft x 8.33 ppg x 0.052
                              = 3,465 psi
               At packer           = 3,465 psi + [(12,000 – 8,000 ft) x 9.0 ppg x 0.052]
                              = 5,337 psi
                                     Page 22 of 35                        Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 51 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

     Net burst load at packer       = 11,519 psi – 5,337 psi
                              = 6,182 psi


5.4.4 Selecting a Casing that Meets the Burst Loads
     From the net burst loads generated by looking at the various installation, drilling and production
      load cases the worst case burst load that the casing will have to tolerate can be determined.
     From casing tables  it is then possible to choose a casing or series of casings that match the
      worst case burst and worst case collapse loads.

     Remember that the burst or internal yield of the casing needs to be down rated by the Design
      Factor.

     Example – 13-3/8” Intermediate Casing
     From the previous examples, the worst case collapse (during drilling) and the worst case burst
      (during drilling) are plotted on the same graph.

     Assuming that the following 13-3/8” casing is available in stock
      13-3/8” 68 lb/ft K55
      13-3/8” 72 lb/ft N80

     The collapse ratings for both of these casings are determined and plotted on the graph. From
       this it can be seen that either of these casings is acceptable from a collapse standpoint.

     The burst ratings for both of these casings are determined, downrated by the design factor of
      1.1 and then plotted on the graph. From this it can be seen that the 68 lb/ft K55 casing can only
     be used for the top 1,500 ft.

       In practice it is more likely that a full string of 72 lb/ft N80 casing would be run.
     See attached graph.

                       
                                          68#                68#
                                       K55               K55

                2,000



            ft
                              (TVD)                  WorstCollapseCase              72#N80
                4,000
                              Depth


                6,000



                8,000

                                                                           Worst Case
                                                                                    Burst             72#
                                                                      N80
                10,000

                               1,000      2,000    3,000     4,000    5,000     6,000

                                                              Pressure (psi)


                     1       13.3/8" 68 lbft K55 Collapse   = 1,950 psi
                     2       13.3/8" 72lbft N80 Collapse    = 2,670 psi
                     3       13.3/8" 68lbft K55 Burst      = 3,450 psi
                                                   = 3,136 psi (downrated by design factor)
                     4       13.3/8" 72lbft N80 Burst      = 5,380 psi
                                                   = 4,891 psi (downrated by design factor)


                  Selecting casing for Collapse & Burst





                                     Page 23 of 35                        Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 52 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

5.4.5 Other Considerations for Burst Design
      Casing Wear
     As for collapse, if casing wear is anticipated to be an issue then this needs to be accounted for.

     To allow for casing wear, the API burst rating should be multiplied by a casing wear factor
     (CWF) as shown in the following table. These values of CWF have been derived from finite
      element analysis of different sizes, weights and grades of casing subjected to different wear
      grooves.

                Percent Casing Wear           CWF
                       0                         0
                      10                            0.9
                      20                            0.8
                      30                            0.7
                      40                            0.6

     More detail on casing wear can be found later.

5.5  Tensile Design
      Using the casing selected that meets the collapse and burst loads,  it is then necessary to
      confirm that this casing will also meet the requirements of the tensile design.

5.5.1 Tensile Installation Loads

      This stage involves assessing the suitability of the selected casing for withstanding running
      loads, cementing loads and any pressure testing.

          It is assumed that the casing is fixed at surface but free to move at the shoe.

     The loads that need to be considered are as follows.

     Weight in Air
     The weight of casing in air is simply the nominal casing weight multiplied by the true vertical
      depth of the casing.

                                Fair    = W x TVD
             where W    = Nominal casing weight (lb / ft)
                TVD   = TVD below point of interest to casing shoe (ft)

     Buoyancy
     Buoyancy can be calculated using the pressure area method and is normally the hydrostatic
      pressure multiplied by the casing cross sectional area.

     Care needs to be taken  if tapered strings of casing are used as the buoyancy force will vary
     depending upon the depth and outside and inside diameters.

     Buoyancy is always subtracted.

    When the same fluid is on the inside and outside of the casing (i.e. when casing is being run)
      the following equation can be used.
                          Fbuoy   = Pe x (Ao – Ai)
             where  Pe    = Hydrostatic pressure at the bottom of the casing (psi)
                     Ao    = Area of the outside diameter (in2)
                          Ai     = Area of the inside diameter (in2)
    When different fluids are on the inside and outside of the casing (i.e. during cementing) the
       following equation can be used.
                          Fbuoy   = (Pe x Ao) – (Pi x Ai)
            Where Pe     = External hydrostatic pressure at the bottom of the casing

                                     Page 24 of 35                        Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 53 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
               DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

               Ao    = Area of the outside diameter (in2)
                   Pi     = Internal hydrostatic pressure at the bottom of the casing
                   Ai     = Area of the inside diameter (in2)

Bending
Whenever pipe is forced around a bend or curve in the well, a bending force will occur. The
bending force is a tensile load occurring on the outer wall and compressive loads on the inner
wall of the casing.

Bending loads are calculated using the following formula
                   Fbend   = 64 x DLS x OD x W

        where DLS   = dog leg severity (º / 100 ft)

          OD    = casing outside diameter (in)

In nominally vertical wells the DLS can assumed to be 1º  / 100  ft. For deviated wells the
bending load only applies to the point where curvature exists i.e. in build sections.

Drag
Drag is the result of sliding resistance between the well bore and the pipe. It occurs in deviated
wells and in sticky tight holes. It is not easy to compute manually and is best left to computer
simulations.

Shock
Shock loading is the load resulting from movement of the casing as it is run in the hole or when
the slips are set or when the casing encounters a ledge downhole.
Shock loads are calculated using the following formula

                    Fshock  = 1780 x V x As
        where V     = instantaneous velocity (ft / sec)
                As    = Ao - Ai (in2)

Care should be taken that the instantaneous velocity used in this calculation is not exceeded
during rig operations.

Pressure Testing
The purpose of a casing test is to verify that the casing string can withstand the maximum
anticipated burst loads.  Therefore  it should exceed the greatest predicted loads during both
drilling and production operations.
                       Fptest   = Pptest x Ai
       Where  Pptest   = Plug bump pressure or applied pressure test (psi)


Example
Running 13-3/8” 72 lb/ft Intermediate Casing to 9,750 ft
Inside Diameter 12.347”
Mud Weight 11 ppg
Instantaneous Velocity 5 ft/sec


                        Fair    = 9,750 ft x 72 lb/ft

                    = 702,000 lbs
                   Fbuoy   = 9,750 ft x 11 ppg x 0.052 x [(13.3752 – 12.3472) x π / 4]

                    = 115,821 lbs
                   Fbend   = 64 x 1º / 100 ft x 13.375” x 72 lb/ft
                    = 61,632 lbs
                    Fshock  = 1780 x 5 ft/sec x [(13.3752 – 12.3472) x π  / 4]
                    = 184,832 lbs
                                Page 25 of 35                        Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 54 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


                                   Ftotal   = Fair - Fbuoy + Fbend + Fshock
                        = 702,000 – 115,821 + 61,632 + 184,832 lbs
                        = 832,643 lbs

     Example
     Cementing 13-3/8” 72 lb/ft Intermediate Casing at 9,750 ft
      Inside Diameter 12.347”
    Mud Weight 11 ppg
     Top of lead slurry at 3,000 ft
     Weight of lead slurry 11.6 ppg
     Top of tail slurry at 9,000 ft
     Weight of tail slurry 15.8 ppg
      Plug bump pressure 3,000 psi


                                Fair    = 9,750 ft x 72 lb/ft

                        = 702,000 lbs

      External Hydrostatic    = (3,000 ft x 11 ppg x 0.052) + (6,000 ft x 11.6 ppg x 0.052) +

                              (750 ft x 15.8 x 0.052)

                        = 5,951 psi

       Internal Hydrostatic     = 9,750 ft x 11 ppg x 0.052

                        = 5,577 psi
                          Fbuoy   = (5,951 psi x 13.3752 x π / 4) – (5,577 psi x 12.3472 x π / 4)
                        = 168,425 lbs
                          Fbend   = 64 x 1º / 100 ft x 13.375” x 72 lb/ft
                        = 61,632 lbs
                               Fptest   = 3,000 psi x 12.3472 x π / 4
                        = 359,198 lbs

                                   Ftotal   = Fair - Fbuoy + Fbend + Fptest
                        = 702,000 – 168,425 + 61,632 + 359,198 lbs
                        = 954,405 lbs

5.5.2 Tensile Drilling and Production Loads
      This stage involves assessing the suitability of the selected casing for withstanding the loads
       that could be imposed on the casing after the cement has set.

          It is assumed that the casing is fixed at surface and fixed at the top of cement in the annulus.

     The loads that need to be considered are as follows.

     Landing Casing
     Any additional tension applied to the casing after waiting on cement. This is normally restricted
       to jackup or platform operations where tension is applied prior to setting slips in the wellhead.

     Buckling
     The potential for buckling exists if any of the following occur:
      •   Internal mud density increases
      •   Internal surface pressure increases
      •   Annular fluid is removed or annulus mud density is reduced
      •   Casing is landed with less than full hanging weight
      •   Temperature of the casing increases



                                     Page 26 of 35                        Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 55 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

          If any of the above occurs this results in ballooning of the uncemented portion of the casing
       string, which could result in buckling.

      Buckling itself does not mean that the casing has failed. However as buckling develops into a
       helical form this can promote increased dogleg severity and restrict tool drift length and can
     promote casing wear.

       In general, for all wells deeper than 10,000 ft, casing designs must be evaluated for the impact
       of buckling.

     The effects of buckling can be reduced by raising the top of cement (reducing the amount of
     uncemented pipe) or (if practical) increasing the amount of tension applied prior to setting the
       slips.

5.5.3 Confirming that the Selected Casing Meets the Tensile Loads
     From the tensile loads generated by looking at the various installation, drilling and production
      load cases, the worst case tensile load that the casing will have to tolerate can be determined.

     The tensile capacity of the casing is down rated by the Design Factor and  if this exceeds the
      worst case tensile load then the selected casing is acceptable for service.

          If the tensile capacity after down rating by the design factor is less than the worst case tensile
      load then the selected casing is not acceptable for service. The next weight and / or grade up
       that still meets the collapse and burst loads is then selected and the tensile loads re-calculated
      (changing the weight of the casing affects the internal diameter of the casing and these two
      properties affect all of the loads that make up the tensile load). This process is repeated until a
       suitable casing is selected.

     Example
      13-3/8” 72 lb/ft N80 Intermediate Casing set at 9,750 ft
     From previous examples, this casing meets the collapse and burst worst case loadings
     From previous calculations, worst case tensile load occurs at plug bump.
          Ftotal    = 954,405 lbs

     From casing tables the tensile rating of the pipe body and connections are obtained and
     downrated by the design factor of 1.3

                                        Tensile Capacity           Downrated Capacity
            Pipe body                 1,661,000 lbs                 1,277,000 lbs
         STC                      1,040,000 lbs                 800,000 lbs
            Connection
         BTC                      1,693,000 lbs                 1,302,000 lbs
            Connection

     From this  it can be seen that the pipe body and the buttress (BTC) connection have an
      acceptable tensile rating and are suitable for this application. However the short round (STC)
      connection is not acceptable as it’s downrated tensile capacity is below Ftotal.
          It is important, when looking at tensile capacity that the weaker of the pipe body and connection
        is used.

5.6  Triaxial Design
     The collapse, burst and tensile loads calculated so far have all assumed that the stresses are in
     a single or uniaxial direction. In practice, service loads generate triaxial stresses.
     The three principal stresses for casing are axial (σ a), radial (σr) and tangential (σt) as shown
      below.





                                     Page 27 of 35                        Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 56 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
               DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE




                                           σa


           σr





                                                                                                            σt


                σt
                                                                                    σr




                                          σa


         σVME = {0.5[σa-σt)2 + (σt-σr)2 + (σr-σa)2]}½



The recommended theory for calculating triaxial stress is known as the Von Mises theory. This
theory consists of defining an equivalent stress (σvme) and then relating that stress to the
minimum specified yield stress (σy) of the casing.

The calculation to determine triaxial stress is best conducted using a suitable casing design
programme.

Triaxial design should be performed whenever any of the following conditions apply
•   Expected pore pressure > 12,000 psi
•   Temperature > 250ºF
•  H2S service
•   OD/t < 15

According to Von Mises theory, an axial tensile stress can increase the tangential stress
capacity and vice versa. This is shown in the diagram below.





                                Page 28 of 35                        Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 57 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Internal  Pressure                                 Triaxle ellipse
                                           API Burst Line                                                            for Pn = 0

                   API Axial                                                                             API Axial
                    Compression Line                                                                          Tension Line

                                                                             "Burst Region"


                              Axial Compression                                                                               Axial Tension




                                                                    "Collapse Region"



                        Triaxle ellipse                                                             API Collapse
                          for Pi = 0                                                                          Line

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       External  Pressure


                                                         Triaxial Load Capacity Diagram


     The equivalent stress (σvme) should be calculated at the top and bottom of each casing interval
       of weight and grade, at the top of cement, at a particular depth where there is a specific change
       in internal or external pressure or a specific hole geometry (DLS, washout, etc).

       Specialist casing design software is required to perform a triaxial casing design.

6.0  Casing Wear

     Having an understanding of the cause of casing wear will allow the well planner to optimise the
       well design and drillpipe specifications in order to reduce the occurrence to a minimum.

      Casing wear takes the form of a wear groove generated by a rotating drill string that is forced
       into the casing wall.  High sidewall forces and extended contact with a rotating drill string will
     wear the section down.  Areas that are commonly identified with casing wear include kick off
      points and dogleg’s. The implications of casing wear can be recognised as:

      •   Reduction in the pressure integrity due to wear groove(s), reducing the burst  / collapse
          values
      •   Expensive repairs to drillpipe hardfacing.
      •   Friction (surface torque) can be high.
      •  Wear groove may act as a starting point for future corrosion.

     The types of casing wear are as follows:

     Adhesive Wear
     The transfer of material from a low strength body to a high strength body by solid-phase
      welding. However, the weld bond is weak and often the material ‘falls’ off the tool joint and is
      incorporated into the drilling fluid system as a flake.

     Abrasive Wear – Machining
      Often stems from pieces of exposed tungsten carbide on tool joints removing material from the
      casing wall. Again debris is generated that is incorporated into the fluid system.





                                     Page 29 of 35                        Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 58 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

     Abrasive Wear – Grinding / Polishing
     Hard particles produce a stand off between the casing wall and the tool joint. The casing is
       cyclically loaded by the particles due to the drill pipe rotation causing fatigue and the surface to
     become brittle.

     These three types of casing wear are given wear factors to highlight their severity:

      Wear Mechanism        Debris Produced       Wear Factor
       Adhesive                  Cuttings                400-1800
       Abrasive – Machining      Flakes                  20-50
       Abrasive – Grinding      Powder                   0.1-10

6.1  Casing Wear Prediction
      Casing wear mechanisms can be identified prior to the start of a well, and it is the control of the
     mechanism that reduces the amount of casing wear.

6.1.1 Contact Pressure and Load
        Initially this is very high due to the small contact area resulting in high pressures and a large
     amount of wear.  As wear continues  it  will expose a larger surface area and  will help to
       distribute and reduce the wear pressure.  Doglegs and build and drop off sections deserve
      special attention though. Transocean sets acceptable sidewall force limits as 2200 for water
     based mud systems and 2500 for oil base mud systems.

6.1.2 Well Design
      Anticipate and consider ‘what  if’ scenarios.  Likelihood of additional drilling, stuck pipe and
       fishing operations for example.

6.1.3 Doglegs
     Doglegs are unavoidable in many wells, and when designing a well it is important to understand
       their effect on casing wear.   Whilst  drilling the dogleg  it  is important to maintain  drilling
      parameters as constant as possible to control the dogleg severity. Smoothing out the dogleg
       profile can also have an impact on wear reduction and is strongly advised. Implementing a deep
       kick off will lower the amount of sidewall forces exerted on the casing.

6.2  Control of Casing Wear
      Certain areas have been  identified that require to be considered during well planning to
      minimise casing wear. In the field an MFCT log can be run before and after the predicted wear
       to measure the extent of the damage.

6.2.1 Casing Material
          It cannot be assumed that the higher the strength for resisting collapse and burst the higher the
      resistance to wear. Materials must be looked at closely if significant casing wear is expected.

6.2.2 Wear Bushing, Crossovers, Centralisers and Cementing
      Regular inspection of the wear bushing is important based purely on the number of times it is
     exposed to tool joints travelling in and out of the hole.

    When crossing over between two different weights and grades of casing this section needs to
     be supported due to the different stiffness of the two sections.  Support can either come from
     cement or adequate centralisation, otherwise a local dogleg might well develop. The internal
       wall of the crossover is shouldered and will experience wear from  drill pipe tool joints, the
      shoulder should be chamfered as much as possible.



                                     Page 30 of 35                        Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 59 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

          It is prudent to locate the planned top of cement away from a zone of high sidewall forces as
      immediately above the cemented pipe a local dogleg is likely to develop.

      Centralisers should be placed across the pipe body as opposed to locating them at the
      coupling.  The additional stand-off provided by the centraliser may result in a local dogleg
      establishing itself above the coupling.

6.2.3 Drill Pipe Hardbanding
     Today the vast majority of hardbanding is a ‘wear resistant alloy’, such as Armacor M and Arnco
     200 XT, that exhibits a uniform surface hardness, as opposed to needing the addition of
      tungsten carbide. Nevertheless it is still important to check what is received to make sure it is
       ‘user friendly’.

6.2.4 Drillpipe Protectors
     These are placed on the body of the drill pipe a few feet above the tool joint to provide stand-off
     between the tool joint and the casing. They are an elastomer and are manufactured to be ½”
       larger than the OD of the tool joint, during their use they require regular calipering for wear and
     subsequent renewal. An alternative is to incorporate rotating sleeve subs within the drill string.

6.2.5 Mud Types
     Water Based Mud’s
     Severe adhesive wear with friction. Caused by a lack of solid barriers in the mud.

      Oil based Mud’s
     Reduced friction. Potential for casing wear dependant upon drill pipe hardbanding and sidewall
      contact pressures.

     Unweighted / Weighted Mud’s
      Incorporating a weighting material  will provide solids to the mud system that  will act as
       particulate matter between the tool joint and the casing, providing a layer between the rolling
      surfaces. Particle size and hardness are relevant, a larger particle will provide greater stand-off,
     and a softer material will perform better. For example barite performs better than additions of
      haematite and quartz.

     Sand / Silt
     Sand particles are too large to ‘roll’ in the space between tool joint and casing.  Unweighted
     systems experience so much adhesive wear as to make the abrasive influence of sand
      unnoticed.  In a weighted system the effect of sand is again unnoticed due to the diluting effect
       of the weighting product.

      Lubricants
      Their effect is dependent on surface conditions of the casing / tool joint and the amount of solids
       in the system.  Lubricants produce a film that lies on the casing and the tool joint providing a
      surface of low resistance.  However as the solids content of a drilling system may increase
      these solids will penetrate the film to such a degree as to prevent any film  / film contact,
      rendering the lubricant ineffective.  If lubricants are included solids control will be a high priority.

7.0  Material Selection.

     Two types of service need to be considered:
      •   Strings that are exposed to brines and mud’s.
      •   Strings that are exposed to reservoir fluids.

7.1  Strings Exposed to Brines and Mud’s.
     Casing material is commonly composed of carbon or low-alloy steels; there is a wide range
      available as shown in API 5CT.  Depending on geographical location the buyer may have
     access to non-API standard tubulars that claim to have a better performance.
                                     Page 31 of 35                        Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 60 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

    When dealing with completion brines and drilling muds, corrosion resistance is often not critical
       to the design.  However   if exposure to hydrogen sulphide  is anticipated, casing  that  is
      manufactured for sour service will have to be selected.

     API controlled grades of steel for high pressure sour wells can lead to very heavy wall casing
      designs.  There is growing interest to use specialised high strength grades from non-API
      vendors.

7.2  Strings Exposed to Reservoir Fluids.
       Primarily this section concerns itself with production tubing, however production casing / liners
     need to be considered for possible exposure due to a leak or tubing failure.

    A rough guide exists for materials required, based on the partial pressures of carbon dioxide
     and hydrogen sulphide in the gas phase.

                 1. CO2 < 3 psia and H2S < 0.05 psia
                 2. CO2 < 3 psia and H2S > 0.05 psia
                 3. CO2 > 3 psia and H2S < 0.05 psia
                 4. CO2 > 3 psia and H2S > 0.05 psia

     To determine the partial pressure in the gas phase multiply the mole fraction by the bottom hole
      pressure.

      For example:
      10,000 psi bottom hole pressure with 50 ppm H2S = 0.5 psia
      (50 / 1,000,000 x 10,000)

      10,000 psi bottom hole pressure with 3% CO2 = 300 psia
      (3 / 100 x 10,000)

       1. CO2 < 3 psia and H2S < 0.05 psia
     Carbon or low alloy steels. If carbon steels are selected a rigorous look at their service life and
      corrosion potential is needed.

       2. CO2 < 3 psia and H2S > 0.05 psia
     Carbon or alloy steels. However the materials need to meet the standards of NACE MR0175-
      91. Grades that are for sour service are found in API 5CT and NACE MR-0175-91.

       3. CO2 > 3 psia and H2S < 0.05 psia
          It is not recommended to use carbon or low alloy steels because they will have insufficient
      corrosion resistance. Inhibitors and plastic lined pipe is one option however the job starts to get
     a little complicated.

    A material that has been proven in the field is 13% chrome steel tubulars. Although a number of
       limitations do exist, above grade C-95 the material becomes brittle if in sour service and above
     125oC there is an increased risk of pitting or general corrosion.

          If the grade or temperature is affecting the design then a more exotic tubular is required like
      duplex stainless steel for example.

       4. CO2 > 3 psia and H2S > 0.05 psia.
      This environment is indicative of a corrosive well and a sour well. Corrosion resistant alloys and
      chloride / sulphide stress cracking resistant metals are needed for the design. 13% Chrome
       steel tubulars are not adequate and consideration can be given for 22% or 25% Cr, but with an
     H2S partial pressure above 1.5 psia austentitic stainless steels need to be used.

     As much information on the operating conditions is required in order to complete the final
       selection. Such as:
      •   Design Life
      •   Fluid types

                                     Page 32 of 35                        Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 61 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      •   Partial pressures of CO2 and H2S
      •   Operating and design pressures
      •   Operating temperature
      •   Flow rate / regime
      •   Possibility of sand production
      •   Water chemistry
      •  Any changes likely during the life of the field / tubulars
      •   Is gas lift likely?

7.3  Considerations for Corrosion Resistant Alloys

7.3.1 Chlorides and Bromides
      Unexpectedly high levels for the casing design are likely to cause pitting and chloride stress
      cracking. An increase in temperature will heighten this.   It may be necessary to restrict the
      temperature and / or chloride / bromide levels to complete the design.

7.3.2 Mechanical Properties
      Tensile Properties
     The yield strength can be anything up to 10% less in the transverse direction with materials that
      depend, for their strength, on cold working.   If a specific application is required then the exact
     amount it is reduced by will need to be determined.

      Yield strengths that are quoted in manuals are for an ambient temperature, hence for any
      increase in the temperature a decrease in the yield strength will occur.  This is particularly
      important when selecting corrosion resistant  alloys, and the amount of reduction  for the
      designed temperature will need to be known.

     The highest grade recommended when using duplex and highly alloyed austenitic steels is 125k
       psi. Above this and there is a chance for there to be a reduction in the corrosion resistance.

     Toughness
      This varies with temperature and tubulars can be ductile or brittle.  Brittle behaviour needs to be
      avoided because it can be responsible for sudden failures. A control measure that can be used
        is the Charpy Impact Test, which is relatively inexpensive.

     Erosion – Corrosion
     The fluid velocity can advance tubular corrosion, and the design of the system needs to remain
     below the critical velocity. The critical velocity will naturally vary between the different alloys.

7.4  Corrosion Mechanisms
     Carbon Dioxide
     Carbon dioxide combines with water to form carbonic acid and will attack carbon steels where
      the iron carbonate layer is missing, hence localised pitting develops.

     The rate of corrosion is controlled by a number of factors including CO2 partial pressure, pH,
      temperature, fluid velocity and other chemicals.

     Hydrogen Sulphide
     Sources include:     Well fluids
                              Bacterial activity
                       Breakdown products of other chemical additives

     Hydrogen sulphide dissolves in water and can form a protective layer of iron sulphide scale,
       pitting occurs where the scale is not present.

     Hydrogen is a natural by-product of water corrosion and the hydrogen molecules are too large
       to diffuse into the metal.   In the presence of hydrogen sulphide the hydrogen atoms are
      prevented from combining into molecules, leaving the atoms to diffuse into the metal.
                                     Page 33 of 35                        Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 62 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


     The hydrogen atoms tend  to concentrate  in areas  that are already under  stress,  their
      accumulation increases the stress levels and reduces the strength of the material.  Stressed
      areas are stressed even further and cracking results which can occur rapidly.

     Oxygen
      Dissolved oxygen attacks iron converting it to an oxide and / or hydroxide. The rate of corrosion
        is controlled by the ability of the oxygen to diffuse to the area to support the corrosion process.

      This can be a problem when using water based drilling mud and in a water injection system.
     Scavengers are added to the mud and degassers or stripping units are associated with water
       injection.

      Halide Ions
     Cause localised pitting and / or crevice corrosion on materials used for downhole equipment.
      Halide ions are also responsible for causing stress corrosion cracking, in particular materials
     such as austentitic steels.  Cracking will normally occur above 50oC and the result is brittle
       failure well below the materials yield strength.

     Erosion – Corrosion
     Damage is increased because of the velocity of a passing fluid.  Velocity limits to minimise this
      form of erosion are related to API RP 14E.

     Galvanic Corrosion
      Corrosion that takes place when two metals are coupled in an erosive environment. One metal
        will act as an anode and corrode faster, the other the cathode.  The controls on this sort of
      erosion are the conductivity of the corrosive medium, surface area of the two metals and the
      difference in equilibrium potentials of the two metals.

      Localised Corrosion
      Corrosion pitting where certain areas of the metal act as an anode.  Process is enhanced by
      dissolved oxygen and is strongly influenced by temperature.  Pitting is particularly damaging, as
           it is more penetrative than general corrosion.

      Crevice corrosion is localised and confined to a gap between two materials. Within the gap the
      environment can be quite different to that outside enhancing the corrosive process, higher
      temperatures are conducive to this process.

8.0  Pore Pressure and Fracture Gradient Prediction

8.1  Pore Pressure Prediction
     Pore pressure can be predicted before, during and after drilling by applying various methods,
     some directly and others indirectly or by correlation. The “before drilling” is important as a basis
       of design for the drilling programme. The “during drilling” determination will serve to confirm the
      design whilst the “after drilling” determination will provide data for future well designs in the area
       giving a greater level of confidence.

     Before drilling estimation:
      Lithology correlation – knowledge regarding abnormally pressured formations can be applied to
      occurrences of the same lithology if predicted along the proposed wellpath.

      Shallow seismic (bright spots) – used to detect shallow gas and can infer seabed characteristics
       e.g. firm for jacking up.

      Seismic depth correlation – used to identify salt structures and predict depths of rocks whose
      signatures were determined on previous offset wells.

      Seismic interval velocity plots – if a shot point corresponds with the well location, can be used
     as a sonic log


                                     Page 34 of 35                        Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 63 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

     During drilling:
      Corrected d exponent dc – in over-pressured zones, compaction trends are reduced and
      formations are more porous/permeable than expected. Hence drilling rates increase as there is
      less resistance (less drill chip hold down force)
   MWD data – similarly, as compaction trends decrease in over-pressured zones, the MWD will
       identify higher porosities than predicted against a normal trend.
      Kicks – indicate pore pressure greater than hydrostatic
       Drillstem tests – measure pore pressure directly

     Changes in pore pressure indications:
     Gas cut mud – indicates increasing pore pressure
      Flowline temperature changes
     Change in drilling rate
      Chloride change – increase as pore pressure increases (influx of formation water)
     Torque and drag – decrease as pore pressure increases
     Volume, shape and size of cuttings – increase in pore pressure yields “pressure cavings” in
      increasing quantities

      After drilling estimation:
      Well logging – any logs that allow porosity or resistivity to be determined e.g. sonic, density.
     Readings should be taken in shale and avoid washouts. Again deviations from trend lines of
      normally pressured formations will indicate the onset of an abnormally pressured zone.
     Bottom hole pressure surveys

      Note:
       1.   Trend lines and pressure correlation can vary both from area to area and even with
           formations of differing geological age within the same lithological column.
       2.   Analysis assumes consistent shale properties which is unlikely.
       3.   In hard rock areas, (carbonate sequences), compaction trends are interrupted since
          carbonates do not compact in the same manner as clays.

8.2  Fracture Gradient Prediction
      Fracture gradient prediction is now largely based on the work carried out by Hubbert and Willis
       in 1957.  This work predicted fracture pressure for vertical fractures based on a relationship
     between the overburden pressure gradient, pore pressure gradient and the matrix stress
       coefficient (ratio of horizontal to vertical stress). They assumed that fracture pressure was equal
       to pore pressure plus the horizontal component of the vertical stress in the rock.
      Later workers have developed this basic relationship into the more usual forms today.

     Mathews and Kelly 1967:     F = P/D + Ki(σ/D)

     Where  F     = fracture gradient, psi/ft
           P     = formation pore pressure, psi
            σ     = matrix stress at point of interest, psi
          D     = depth at point of interest, ft tvd
                Ki     = matrix stress coefficient, no units

     Eaton 1976:               F = ((S/D – Pf/D).(y/(1-y)) + (Pf/D)

     Where   Pf    = formation pressure, psi
          D     = depth at point of interest, ft tvd
           S     = overburden gradient, psi
           Y     = Poisson’s ratio (shear strain/axial strain)

      Offset well data may yield leak off test data that can be plotted against vertical depth and
       lithology and correlated against the proposed well plan to give additional fracture gradient
      reference points.




                                     Page 35 of 35                        Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 64 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

                    SECTION 4

            DRILLING & COMPLETION FLUIDS

     Contents
1.0   Functions of a Drilling Fluid                                                      1
2.0   Types of Drilling Fluid                                                          2
  2.1    Air / Gas                                                                   2
  2.2   Water Based Mud                                                           2
     2.2.1   Non-Dispersed Muds                                                     2
     2.2.2    Dispersed Muds                                                         2
     2.2.3   Calcium Treated Muds                                                    2
     2.2.4   Polymer Muds                                                           2
     2.2.5   Low Solids Muds                                                        3
     2.2.6    Saltwater Muds                                                          3
     2.2.7   General Comments on Water Based Muds                                    3
  2.3    Oil Based Mud                                                              3
     2.3.1    Diesel Based Muds                                                      3
     2.3.2    Invert Oil Based Mud                                                     3
     2.3.3    Oil Based Muds (All Oil)                                                   4
     2.3.4    Synthetic Based Muds                                                    4
     2.3.5    General Comments on Oil Based Muds                                       4
3.0    Drilling Fluid Selection                                                          4
4.0    Drilling Fluid Additives                                                          5
5.0   Contamination                                                                6
  5.1   Sources of Contamination                                                     6
  5.2    Solids Control                                                              6
  5.3    Drilled Solids Classification                                                    7
6.0    Drilling Fluid Properties                                                         7
  6.1   Density                                                                    7
     6.1.1    Increasing Density                                                       8
     6.1.2   Reducing Density                                                        8
  6.2   Funnel Viscosity                                                             8
  6.3    Plastic Viscosity                                                             8
     6.3.1    Increasing PV                                                           8
     6.3.2   Reducing PV                                                           8
  6.4    Yield Point                                                                 9
     6.4.1    Increasing YP                                                           9
     6.4.2   Reducing the Yield Point                                                  9
  6.5   Gel Strength                                                                9
  6.6    Filtration                                                                  10
     6.6.1     Filter Cake                                                             10
     6.6.2    Fluid Loss                                                             10
  6.7    Solids                                                                    10
     6.7.1   High Gravity and Low Gravity Solids                                         10
     6.7.2   Sand Content                                                          10
     6.7.3    Clay Content                                                           11
  6.8   Chemical Analysis                                                          11
     6.8.1   Water Based Mud                                                       11
     6.8.2    Oil Based Mud                                                         11
  6.9   pH                                                                       11
  6.10   Electrical Stability                                                           12
7.0   Trend Analysis                                                               12
  7.1   Water Based Mud Trend Analysis                                              12
  7.2    Oil Based Mud Trend Analysis                                                 13
8.0   Formation Damage                                                           14
1.0  Functions of a Drilling Fluid

     The primary functions of a drilling fluid are:
      •      Well control

                                   Page 1 of 15                            Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 65 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      •      Maintain hole stability
      •      Hole cleaning
      •      Transmit hydraulic horsepower to the bit
      •      Formation evaluation

     These functions are achieved by careful selection of the drilling fluid and maintenance of its
       properties.

       Additional functions of a drilling fluid are:
      •  Suspend cuttings and weighting agent while the fluid is static e.g. connections
      •   Release entrained cuttings at surface
      •   Cool and lubricate the bit and drillstring
      •   Create a thin, impermeable filtercake to reduce fluid invasion
      •   Support tubulars through buoyancy effect
      •   Prevent and control corrosion of drillstring etc

2.0  Types of Drilling Fluid

     There are three main types of drilling fluid, distinguished by their base fluid formulation

2.1  Air / Gas
     Used for drilling hard, dry formations or to combat lost circulation.
      Rarely used offshore, except for underbalanced or coiled tubing drilling.

2.2  Water Based Mud
     The main types of water based mud are
      •   Non-dispersed
      •   Dispersed
      •   Calcium treated
      •   Polymer
      •  Low solids
      •   Saltwater

2.2.1 Non-Dispersed Muds
      Generally includes lightly treated, low weight muds and spud muds. No thinners added. Usually
      top hole and shallow well applications.

2.2.2 Dispersed Muds
      With increasing depths and mud weights, mud formulations  require dispersant  additives
      (lignosulphonates,  lignites, tanins)  to cancel the  inter-particle  attractive forces  that create
       viscosity in water based mud. This effectively extends the use of the mud system until it has to
     be replaced.

2.2.3 Calcium Treated Muds
       Typically, this group would include the gyp-ligno and lime based muds. Here, a source of
      calcium (gypsum, lime) is added in excess to ensure a constant supply of calcium ions, which is
       effective in slowing down the shale hydration process. These muds tend to be relatively cheap to
      run and dump and dilute policies are the norm for ultimate solids control.

2.2.4 Polymer Muds
     These muds utilise long chain, high molecular weight polymers, which can encapsulate drilled
       solids to prevent dispersion or coat them for inhibition. They also provide viscosity and fluid loss
       properties. Common examples would be PHPA – partially hydrolysed polyacrylate, CMC –
      carboxymethylcellulose and PAC-  polyanionic  cellulose. They  are  intolerant  of  calcium
      contamination and will not withstand temperatures in excess of 300 degF.

                                   Page 2 of 15                            Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 66 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


2.2.5 Low Solids Muds
     These are generally polymer based muds which are designed to have a maximum of no more
       that 6 - 10% solids content by volume.

2.2.6 Saltwater Muds
     These would include the  salt saturated and seawater polymer systems where polymeric
       additives provide viscosity and fluid loss properties.

2.2.7 General Comments on Water Based Muds
      Fresh water based mud (generally used for land wells). Note that pre-hydrating bentonite into a
     50ppb slurry with fresh water is often a first stage in building muds offshore.

     Seawater based mud – this often involves “cutting back” pre-hydrated bentonite from 50ppb to
     20ppb with seawater to provide a base fluid with some initial clay content to provide viscosity and
      support for filter cake formation. Additional polymers are added to control fluid loss and enhance
       viscosity whilst barytes is used to adjust fluid density. Once drilling commences, additional fluid
     would be built simply with seawater and polymers. Drilled solids would replace the bentonite
     component.

      Brine based mud – used to create the most inhibited water based muds i.e. prevention of shale
       swelling. The brine base can comprise sodium, potassium or calcium chloride and, as before,
       additional polymers are added to control fluid loss and enhance viscosity whilst barytes is used
       to adjust fluid density. Additional mud would be  built in the same manner maintaining the
      relevant salt concentration. Examples include:

      •  A salt NaCl (sodium chloride) saturated base would be used for drilling through a massive
            salt zone.
      •  A potassium chloride (KCI) brine base would most often be used for drilling large hole
          sections (17½”) through reactive shales, the potassium ion being the “active” ingredient. It is
           preferentially absorbed into the vacant sites within the lattice structure of the clay particles
          instead of water molecules thus slowing down the hydration process.

    When drilling reservoir sections, it is more usual now for barytes to be replaced as a weighting
      agent by either acid soluble weighting material (calcium carbonate) or brine initially formulated to
      the correct density. This is particularly relevant when completing with sand screens where
      minimal solids contamination is required.

2.3  Oil Based Mud
     The main types of oil based mud are
      •   Diesel based
      •   Invert emulsion
      •   Oil based – all oil
      •   Synthetic

2.3.1 Diesel Based Muds
     These comprise diesel oil as the base fluid mixed with an emulsified brine and are still used in
     some areas of the world despite the high aromatic hydrocarbon content and HSE concerns
      (adverse skin reactions, carcinogenic). The aromatic content (carcinogenic component) of diesel
        is about 30% by volume.

2.3.2 Invert Oil Based Mud
     These are essentially mineral oil based formulations, which include emulsified calcium chloride
      brine occupying from 5 to 50% of the liquid phase. The aromatic content of the base oil is less
      than 10%.


                                   Page 3 of 15                            Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 67 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

2.3.3 Oil Based Muds (All Oil)
     These are formulated using 100% oil as the base fluid and are usually regarded as coring  /
       reservoir drilling fluids.

2.3.4 Synthetic Based Muds
     These are formulated as with the invert muds but the base fluid used contains no aromatics e.g.
       esters, ethers, PAO’s (polyalphaolefins), paraffins.

2.3.5 General Comments on Oil Based Muds
       Essentially, all these fluids except the all oil fluid comprise the same basic components. The
     base fluid (diesel, mineral oil, paraffin, ester etc) is mixed with emulsifiers and calcium chloride
      brine to create a water in oil emulsion followed by filtrate reducer and organophilic clay. Barytes
     can then be added to adjust the density.

      Usually several emulsifiers are added, one being a low end rheology modifier.

     The lime is present to aid one of the emulsifiers used whilst also creating an initial, alkaline
       buffer against acid gas contamination.

     An organophilic (“oil loving”) clay is added to create the required viscosity prior to any barytes
       addition. This is an amine treated clay that can yield in the oil/ water emulsion.
     The calcium chloride is present to balance the water phase salinity with that of the interstitial
      water in the formations being drilled, particularly the shales, to prevent de-stabilising the hole.
     The all oil fluid is simply an oil based mud in which there is no water component. Additives
      comprise lime, acid soluble bridging material and emulsifiers, which are selected to minimise
     any potential formation damage.

      During well control problems, when the mud system is being treated with large amounts of
      barytes,  it is usual to add an oil wetting chemical and a thinner as well as extra emulsifier to
      ensure that all the barytes remains oil wetted and supported by the fluid.
     The usual polymeric additives for a water based mud are ineffective in an oil based mud.

3.0  Drilling Fluid Selection

     The selected drilling fluid is often a compromise of the available choices. The following criteria
     need to be addressed before determining what mud system to use.

      •   Well type
        −   Offset data,  if available, should be used to identify any problems experienced with
              previous mud systems
      •   Environmental
        −   Local legislation may prohibit certain mud types or, in the case of oil based mud, may
               require the use of cuttings containment
      •   Well control requirements
        −  Mud system must be capable of being weighted up to the maximum required to control
              formation pressure
      •   Hole stability
        −   Either chemical  (reactive  shales  requiring an  inhibited system  or  water  soluble
              formations such as salt or anhydrite) or mechanical (stress induced requiring control by
          mud weight)
      •   Temperature / chemical stability of the mud
        −  System must be chemically stable at the maximum expected bottom hole temperature
      •    Drilling performance
        −  System must provide optimum rheology to help maximise penetration rate
        −  System should minimise formation damage in reservoir sections
      •   Cost
        −  Needs to be balanced with expected benefits and performance
      •   Product availability

                                   Page 4 of 15                            Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 68 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

        −   In remote areas may limit choice of system

4.0  Drilling Fluid Additives


      Function          Description                     Product
         Alkalinity,           Control the degree of acidity or       Caustic soda
     pH control             alkalinity of a fluid                Soda ash
                                                              Bicarbonate of soda
       Bactericides        Products used to prevent            Glutaraldehyde
                           degradation of natural organic        Quaternary ammonium
                             additives such as starch and
                         zanthan gum
       Calcium reducers   Used to reduce calcium in          Soda ash
                         seawater and treat calcium           Bicarb
                           contamination from cement,       SAPP (sodium acid pyrophosphate)
                        gypsum, anhydrite
       Corrosion           Control corrosion by creating a      Amine based
        inhibitors             protective film
      Defoamers        Reduce foaming tendencies
        Emulsifiers         Create a heterogeneous mixture of  OBM      Fatty acids
                         two insoluble liquids                       Amine based
                                    WBM     Detergents
                                                              Soaps
                                                                            Surfactants
         Filtrate reducers    Reduce the fluid loss into the         Starch
                           formation                 CMC
                                                                Bentonite
       Flocculants           Clarify fluids and create temporary   Lime
                           increase in viscosity                Acrylamide-based polymers
      Foaming agents     Typically surfactants                   Typically surfactants
       Lost circulation      Plug loss zones. Can be fibrous,     Crushed walnut
       materials (LCM’s)    granular, flake materials or cross-    Mica
                             linked polymer
       Lubricants        Reduce the coefficient of friction      Glycols
                        between fluid and pipe wall.           Oils
                                                                 Surfactants
        Pipe-freeing        Spotted across stuck pipe zone.      Detergents
       agents             Increase lubricity and chemically     Soaps
                             attack filter cake                       Oils
       Shale control       Slow down hydration mechanism in   Soluble calcium and potassium
        inhibitors           shales                            sources
                                                                 Glycol
       Surface active       Surfactants. Reduce interfacial        Emulsifiers
       agents              tension between two surfaces         Flocculants
                                 (water/oil, water/solid etc)            Wetting agents


      Temperature        Increase rheological and filtration      Acrylic polymers
         stability agents        stability under high temperature      Sulphonated polymers
                             conditions                              Lignite
                                                             Lignosulphonate
       Thinners,           Modify the relationship between      Tanins
       dispersants          viscosity and solids content.           Lignite
                      Reduce gels. Reduce attraction of    Lignosulphonate
                             clay particles
        Viscosifiers         Increase viscosity for hole           Bentonite
                             cleaning/ suspension          CMC
                                            PAC
                                           XC polymer
       Weighting agents   Increase density of a fluid to control   Barytes

                                   Page 5 of 15                            Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 69 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

                           formation pressure, increase high     Iron oxide
                          angle hole stability                 Calcium carbonate

5.0  Contamination

5.1  Sources of Contamination
    A contaminant is any undesirable component that causes a detrimental affect to the drilling fluid.

      Typical contaminants are:
      •   Drilled solids
      •   Evaporite salts – interfere with emulsification in OBM’s. Result – mud flips due to water wet
           barytes.
      •  Water flows – well control and water wetting of barytes in OBM
      •   Acid gases – CO2, H2S
      •   Hydrocarbons – well control problem
      •   Temperature - thermal degradation of polymers in WBM
      •  Cement
      •   Seawater – surface line leaks
      •   Bacteria – biopolymers, starches prone to bacterial degradation if not treated.
      •   Spotting fluid (diesel/ base oil) – stuck pipe with WBM
      •   Bicarbonate – excessive treatment of cement contamination
      •   Carbonate – excessive treatment of Ca contamination

     The most common source of contamination found in all types of drilling fluid is caused
     by entrained drilled solids.

       In WBM, this eventually results in a dump and dilute policy being adopted to maintain fluid
       properties. Typically, in a 17½" hole section, the sand traps would be dumped periodically, the
       logic being that, with no agitation, gravity settling should occur allowing the accumulation of fines
      which have passed through the shaker screens. The new mud added would effectively dilute the
       solids remaining in the system and help to bring the fluid properties (viscosity, fluid loss, density)
     back into specification.

     OBM’s are more tolerant of solids contamination. However, once overloaded, the system must
     be changed out since dumping is not an option. Most often, extra volume required to make up
       for losses on cuttings and filling new hole serves to dilute the solids problem.

5.2  Solids Control
     The quality of the solids control equipment onboard can extend the useful life of a mud system
       but, eventually, the re-cycling of the solids causes particle degradation to such an extent that
      they become colloidal sized and untreatable by mechanical means. A typical solids control
     package would include the following equipment:

    Gumbo box – in some areas of the world (Gulf of Mexico), top hole sections produce “gumbo”
      clay cuttings – clay aggregates that, once discharged from the riser, would block any flowline
       conduit. Typically, the box comprises a very coarse inclined grid that permits rapid conductance
       of fluid whilst the large clay aggregates are discharged off the end.

      Shale shakers - it is worth noting that the shale shakers screen 100% of the flow. As such, they
      are critical in controlling the solids content as long as attention is paid to the screens (no holes
     and optimum mesh size). Rigs are now more commonly equipped with four or more linear
      motion, primary shakers (e.g. Thule VSM 100) capable of handling the 1200+ gpm flowrates
       typical of 17½” hole sections. With 200 mesh screens shale shakers can remove particles down
       to 150 microns.

       Desilters - downstream, there are usually 4” cone desilters in various grouping sizes. A 4” cone
     can handle 50gpm and so 2 x 16 cones theoretically could handle a 1600gpm flow. Normally,
       sufficient cones are provided to enable processing of 150% of the maximum flow expected. In
       practice, desilters are only used with WBM due to the high fluid content in the discharge stream.

                                   Page 6 of 15                            Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 70 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

     The underflow (waste stream) can be screened over a 200 mesh (75 micron) screen to recover
      the fluid (mudcleaner for OBM use) but it should be noted that

      •  Each pass through a centrifugal pump will degrade the solids further
      •   Hydrocyclones are ineffective at removing clay solids but do work well when drilling sands –
          the sand grains do not degrade when passed through a centrifugal pump.
      •   With the improvement in the primary solids control equipment (shakers), it is now possible to
        match the cut point of hydrocyclones with shaker screens much earlier while drilling making
          the former almost redundant. Once 200 mesh screens are on the shakers, there is no
         advantage in using the desilter.

     The final item of equipment is the centrifuge, usually one or two in series. For weighted muds i.e.
       in excess of about 12ppg, it is normal to use two in series – the first utilising a low bowl speed
     (<1800rpm) to recover the more dense barytes and the latter than able to operate at much
      higher speeds (>2500rpm) to remove the low gravity solids. However, it should be noted that a
       typical centrifuge will only process fluid at 30 – 50 gpm. With pump rates of 900 – 1200 gpm
     and high penetration rates, they will clearly have minimal impact in the solids control process.
      Extracting solids at the first pass (shale shaker) is the single most effective action.

       In areas where dumping of WBM is prohibited, there is the option to flocculate the solids and
      then recover them by centrifugation. This creates a solid cake  for formal disposal whilst
      rendering the original fluid portion fit to be re-used as a clear base fluid or discharged,

5.3  Drilled Solids Classification
       Drilled solids are classified by particle size

        Drilled Solid                                   Particle Size
      Coarse                                  Greater than 2,000 micron
       Intermediate                          Between 250 and 2,000 micron
      Medium                              Between 74 and 250 micron
       Fine                                 Between 44 and 74 micron
        Ultra-Fine                            Between 2 and 44 micron
        Colloidal                              Less than 2 micron

6.0  Drilling Fluid Properties

6.1  Density
      Density or mud weight is the most critical property of any drilling or completion fluid since this
      provides primary well control. The drilling fluid density must be adjusted so that the hydrostatic
      pressure  it exerts is sufficient to counterbalance formation pressure (except when deliberately
        drilling underbalanced) and allow usually for a safety margin of 200psi.
     However, if the overbalance is too high, differential sticking, formation damage (excessive fluid
      invasion) and hydraulic fracturing (creating fluid losses) can occur.

      Typical weighting agents include the minerals barytes (SG 4.2), dolomite (SG 2.8) and the
       individual salts constituting a particular brine formulation.

       Weighting agent       Maximum weight (ppg)  Maximum weight (SG)
       Barytes                         19.5                   2.34
       Dolomite                        11.5                   1.38
       Potassium Chloride               9.7                    1.16
      Sodium Chloride                 10.0                   1.20
      Sodium Formate                 11.1                   1.33
       Calcium Chloride                11.8                   1.42
       Potassium Formate              13.3                   1.60
       Calcium Bromide                15.4                   1.85
      Caesium Formate                19.7                   2.30
       Zinc Bromide                    20.5                   2.46


                                   Page 7 of 15                            Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 71 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      Note:  In HPHT  wells,  temperature must be  taken  into  account and  the  “true-weight”
      (Pressurised) mud balance used.

6.1.1 Increasing Density
    Mud density is normally increased by the addition of more weighting agent.

      Brines tend to be blended i.e. mixing brines of different density; this avoids carrying excessive
     sacked quantities of salt on inventory at the rig site and labour intensive rig activities. However,
      care should be taken that the blend mixed remains in solution at the temperatures expected i.e.
      ambient, riser and downhole.

6.1.2 Reducing Density
    A reduction of mud density can be achieved by dilution or by mechanical removal of the
      weighting agent or contaminant solids:

      •      Mechanical removal is done by using efficient solid control equipment (e.g. Centrifuge). It
                 is generally the preferred method
      •       Dilution is also an efficient way to reduce the drilling fluid density but it can more easily
             upset the other drilling fluid properties. With brines, any dilution using simply water must
                 utilise fresh water, not seawater thus avoiding potential problems.

6.2  Funnel Viscosity
     The funnel  viscosity, determined using a Marsh Funnel according  to API recommended
      procedures should be used only as a guideline for determining flow properties of low density
        drilling fluids. As the density increases, the funnel viscosity becomes less and less reliable.
      Nevertheless, trends can easily be established and a drastic change in the Funnel Viscosity can
       indicate drilling fluid contamination.

6.3  Plastic Viscosity
       Plastic Viscosity (PV) is defined as the “resistance to flow” due to mechanical frictions. PV
     depends primarily on the solid content and the shape and size of these solids.

6.3.1 Increasing PV
      Solids particles such as Bentonite and Barytes, etc. are required to enable the drilling fluid to
      perform satisfactorily but excessive drilled solids are undesirable; their presence is the primary
     cause of any increase of PV or YP.

          If these drilled solids are allowed to remain in the mud, they are gradually ground into smaller
       particles by shearing action through the bit and pumps, thus increasing PV by creating more
       particles surface area.

6.3.2 Reducing PV
     The concentration of solids in the mud must be reduced in order to lower PV. This can most
       easily be achieved by two methods:

     Use of efficient solids control equipment (often the preferred choice)

     Whole mud/base fluid dilution

     Chemical treatment can be used under certain circumstances to reduce PV i.e. flocculation to
     remove solids contamination. However,  it  is not widely applicable to most  drilling fluids in
    common usage for either technical or economic reasons.





                                   Page 8 of 15                            Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 72 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

6.4  Yield Point
     The yield point (YP) is the “resistance to flow” caused by electro-chemical forces rather than
      mechanical friction. These forces are the result of particle attraction between negative and
       positive charges located on their surfaces. Thus, the Yield Point is a measure of these attractive
      forces under conditions of flow.

       In unweighted drilling fluids, the YP is maintained at a level required for adequate hole cleaning.

       In weighted drilling fluids, a moderately high YP is required to support the heavy weighting agent
       particles in suspension.

6.4.1 Increasing YP
     Occurs  “naturally”  when  flocculation  results  after  the  introduction  of  specific  soluble
      contaminants e.g. salt, anhydride and gypsum encountered whilst drilling.

      Also occurs naturally through solids contamination: an increase in drilled solids prompting an
      increase in inter-particle attractions.

     Through chemical treatment: additions of chemical viscosifiers (i.e. polymers and clays) are
      often made to maintain Yield Point specifications.

6.4.2 Reducing the Yield Point
     The YP can be reduced by either chemical or mechanical treatment:
      •   Chemical treatment:
          Dispersion, de-flocculation or thinning will neutralise the attraction forces.
      •   Mechanical treatment
        Use of efficient solid control equipment is the preferred method.  It can also be done by
             dilution, but unless the solid concentration is high, dilution can upsets the others drilling fluid
           properties.





6.5  Gel Strength
     The gel strength is a measure of the mud ability to form a gel when stationary. This ability
      prevents cuttings and weighting agent material such as Barytes from settling down when
       stationary.

     Gel strength is due to the same attraction forces than the Yield Point but it relates to a condition
       of the drilling fluid at rest. It is a function of both the concentration and size of the solids in the
        drilling fluid.

      •      High Gel Strengths can be undesirable for the following reasons:
      •     Trapped gas and cuttings are not easily released at the surface.

     The breaking of the gel strength developed each time the mud pumps are started creates a
      pressure surge as flow is initiated. This can be sufficient to fracture the formation and induce
      losses if the mud gradient is close to the fracture gradient.

      Increasing and reducing the Gel Strength is achieved in the same way as for the YP.
      Note: The 10 minutes gel test is a good indication of gel strength.




                                   Page 9 of 15                            Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 73 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

6.6  Filtration
     The drilling fluid engineer conducts filtration tests on site.
      •      Standard API filtration conducted at ambient temperature and 100psi pressure.
      •      High Temperature High Pressure (HT/HP) conducted at 500psi differential pressure
            across the mud sample (600psi on top of the fluid and 100psi backpressure held within
             the receiver). The temperature of the test is usually dictated by expected bottom hole
             temperatures, the  test normally being conducted  at 25degF above the maximum
             expected. Typically, tests are conducted within the 200 - 300degF range for most North
          Sea work.

     These tests give indications about two important parameters:

6.6.1 Filter Cake
     The nature of the filter cake is important. The ideal filter cake is thin (maximise the hole diameter
     and reduce differential sticking) and impermeable (prevent filtrate from the mud entering the
       formation). Generally measured in 1/32nd inch or millimeteres. A good quality filter cake should
     be of the order of 2/32nds inch in thickness.

6.6.2 Fluid Loss
      This parameter provides an indication of filtrate invasion into the formation. For reactive shales
      being drilled with a WBM,  it could provide an indication of wellbore stability. When drilling a
       reservoir,  it could provide an indication of the scale of  filtrate invasion and hence potential
      formation damage. Generally quoted in millimetres/30mins. Filtrate values of less than 2mls for
   WBM using the API test and the equivalent with an OBM using the HTHP test could be termed
     good quality filtrate properties.

      Note: The API test is the primary filtrate test for water based muds. It is never conducted on oil
     based muds. The HTHP test is always conducted on oil based muds.

      Both the above filtration tests determine the volume of filtrate and describe the character of the
         filter cake. An API test conducted at room temperature and 100psi differential on an OBM would
       yield no filtrate due to the emulsion strength in the fluid. For most applications, a controlled fluid
      loss is required suggesting controlled invasion by mud filtrate into the surrounding rock. A thin,
       pliant filter cake is desirable as this both minimises differential sticking and indicates controlled
         filter loss.

6.7  Solids

6.7.1 High Gravity and Low Gravity Solids
    A sample of mud is placed in a retort cell (typically 10, 20 or 50 mls) and heated to about 600°C
        (dull red heat). This drives off the water and oil which are both collected in a calibrated receiver
     and measured directly, the oil layer lying above the water. The solid residues in the cell include
      barytes (HGS), drilled solids (LGS) and salt from the aqueous phase. By knowing the volume
     and density of mud retorted and the volume of water and oil collected, it is possible to calculate
      the concentrations of both HGS and LGS in the original sample.

6.7.2 Sand Content
    A sample of mud is decanted into a tube to a measured mark. The contents are then flushed
      through a 200mesh (approx. 75 micron) sieve. The retained solids on the sieve are then back-
      flushed into the tube and allowed to settle. The volume of solids is read directly off calibrations
     on the tube to give a percentage solids figure. Since the screen will only retain sand sized
       particles, the volume of solids is assumed to be sand. Normally, this figure is less than 0.5% but
     can rise to > 3%, especially if the solids control equipment is overloaded i.e. fast drilling in 17½”
      hole through sand. Apart from its unwelcome contribution to the overall solids content in the mud
      (impact on mud rheology), a high sand content can cause abrasion problems with pump liners
     and MWD tools and should be avoided at all times.


                                   Page 10 of 15                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 74 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

6.7.3 Clay Content
     The methylene blue test (MBT) is performed on water based muds. It is based on the capacity
       for reactive clays to absorb methylene blue dye until all the reactive sites are filled with dye. The
       test focuses on being able to detect excess dye. A sample of mud (1ml) is diluted with water and
      boiled for 10 minutes along with 0.5mls of 5N sulphuric acid and 15mls of 3% hydrogen
      peroxide. These are added to remove organic materials present (e.g.polymers) that are also
      able to absorb the dye and would thus interfere with the results. Methylene blue dye is then
     added in 0.5ml increments and the solution spot tested on a filter paper. The presence of a
      spreading, blue halo indicates the presence of excess dye.

    MBT capacity = (ml of methylene blue) / (ml of mud)
      Bentonite ppb = 5 x MBT capacity

      For a new mud system, the MBT value is less than 5ppb equivalent bentonite. When this figure
      reaches 20-25, the mud system is beginning to be overloaded with clays and a dump and dilute
       policy is normally advocated.

6.8  Chemical Analysis

6.8.1 Water Based Mud
      For water based mud, chemical analysis by titration entails determining the alkalinity, chloride,
    Ca and total (Ca and Mg) hardness and Potassium concentration for a KCl based mud.

      While a pH meter can be used to determine the pH directly, the alkalinity titration determines the
      character of the alkalinity. This is based on the presence and concentration of the hydroxide,
      carbonate and bicarbonate ions.

      Calcium ions should be present but not in excess of around 500 mg/lt for polymer based muds.
          If they exceed 1000 mg/lt, they can begin to affect the mud constituents i.e. cause precipitation
       of polymers.

     The potassium level should be monitored to ensure that there is sufficient present to continue to
        inhibit clay swelling  i.e. typically of the order 30 – 45ppb Potassium Chloride (note: usually
      provided as an 80ppb KCl pre-mix with 5% glycol if required).

6.8.2 Oil Based Mud
      For  oil based mud, chemical analysis  is restricted to the water phase and the water-in-oil
      emulsion needs to be broken down first. Analyses include alkalinity, chloride and Calcium.

     The alkalinity in this instance determines the excess lime in the mud necessary to enable some
       of the emulsifiers to work and also to ensure an initial buffer against acid gas contamination.

     The chloride level of the water phase is important and should be balanced against the formation
      water salinity. If  it is too high, the mud will draw water from the formation and render it “brittle”
      (mechanical collapse), too low and water will pass from mud to formation via the process of
     osmosis and result in hydration (clay swelling). Usual water phase salinities are of the order
      150,000-200,000mg/lt chloride for N. Sea shales.

     The Calcium determination enables the sodium chloride salt contribution to be determined by
       difference. Calcium chloride is usually the principal salt additive for OBM’s – it is more soluble
      than NaCl and thus is able to balance higher formation salinities.

6.9 pH
     The pH value is a property of water based mud and is a measure of the acidity of the mud.

    A typical WBM formulation would operate in the pH 9 - 10 range. Maintaining this slightly alkaline
      environment also serves to reduce corrosion by eliminating any acid gases generated (CO2 and
      H2S).

                                   Page 11 of 15                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 75 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      Note: Certain WBM e.g. silicates, operate in a much higher pH range typically 11 – 12.

6.10 Electrical Stability
      This test measures the ability of an OBM to transmit a current. Generally, the stronger the water-
        in-oil emulsion, then the greater the applied voltage required to transmit between two electrodes.
     Water contamination will result in decreasing electrical stability values being recorded. Typical
      values are in the order 400 – 600V.

7.0  Trend Analysis

      Various critical fluid properties should be monitored 2 – 3 times daily during the drilling phase.
     The objective is to establish trend lines for these properties to enable early detection of any
      problems.  It must be remembered that any variation in a mud property is an indication that
      something has changed.

     The following tables show the possible cause of various mud property trends in both water and
         oil based mud systems.

     Note that a full mud check will be required to accurately determine what the problem is. The
      trends help point in the right direction.





7.1  Water Based Mud Trend Analysis

     Mud Property           Trend Change         Possible Cause
     Mud Weight               Increase                      Drill solids increase
                                                 Heavy spot from baryte sag
                                                   Over treatment during weight up
                              Decrease              Formation fluid influx
                                                                Light spot from baryte sag
                                                       Excessive water additions
       Funnel Viscosity            Increase                Reactive shale drilled
                                                                                 Drill solids increase
                                             Low water content
                                                      Calcium contamination from cement
                                                           Anhydrite formation drilled
                              Decrease              Formation water influx
                                                       Excessive water content
        Plastic Viscosity            Increase               Unconsolidated sand drilled
                                                                                 Drill solids increase
                                             Low water content
                              Decrease              Formation water influx
                                                       Excessive water additions
                                                             Solids content decrease
        Yield Point                 Increase                Reactive shale drilled
                                                           Anhydrite formation drilled
                                             Low water content
                                                      Calcium concentration from cement


                                   Page 12 of 15                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 76 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

                              Decrease              Formation water influx
                                                       Excessive water additions
                                                    Decrease in low gravity solids
                                                             Additions of chemical thinners
      Gel Strength               Increase                Reactive shale drilled
                                             Low water content
                                                      Calcium contamination from cement
                                                           Anhydrite formation drilled
                              Decrease              Formation water influx
                                                       Excessive water additions
                                                             Additions of chemical thinners
      API / HPHT Fluid Loss      Increase            Low gravity solids increase
                                                              Flocculation  from  cement,   chloride,
                                                         calcium contamination
                                             Low gel content
                              Decrease           Mud treatment taking effect
     PH                        Increase                 Addition of pH control additives
                                                      Calcium contamination
                              Decrease                Addition of mud products
                                                           Anhydrite formation drilled
       Chlorides                  Increase                  Salt formation drilled
                                                       Pressure transition shale drilled
                                                       Formation water influx
                              Decrease             Water additions
        Total Hardness             Increase                  Salt or calcium formation drilled
                                                       Formation water influx
                              Decrease              Fresh water addition
                                                     Chemical addition
     MBT                      Increase                Reactive shale is drilled
                                                             Addition of bentonite
                              Decrease             Water additions
                                                             Solids removal equipment

7.2 Oil Based Mud Trend Analysis

     Mud Property           Trend Change         Possible Cause
     Mud Weight               Increase                      Drill solids increase
                                                 Heavy spot from baryte sag
                                                   Over treatment during weight up
                              Decrease              Formation fluid influx
                                                                Light spot from baryte sag
                                                       Excessive base oil additions
        Plastic Viscosity            Increase                 Addition of water
                                                             Addition of calcium carbonate
                                                             Addition of primary emulsifier
                                             Low gravity solids increase
                              Decrease                Addition of base oil
                                                    Decrease in low gravity solids
        Yield Point                 Increase                Increase in organophilic clay
                                                             Addition of emulsified water or synthetic
                                                       polymer
                              Decrease                Addition of base oil or degellant
                                                    Decrease in organophilic clay
      Gel Strength               Increase                 Addition of organophilic clay
                                                              Addition of water
                              Decrease              Large base oil additions
                                                          Increase in mud temperature
        Oil Water Ratio          Change               Large addition of water or water influx
                                                      Large additions of base oil
                                                      High bottom hole temperature


                                   Page 13 of 15                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 77 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

        Electrical Stability          Increase                Increase in emulsifier concentration
                                                      Adding wetting agent or base oil
                              Decrease             Decrease in emulsifier concentration
                                                   Newly prepared OBM has low electrical
                                                                           stability but increase with time
      Water Phase Salinity       Increase              Water % of oil water ratio decreasing
                                                             Addition of calcium chloride
                              Decrease             Water % of  oil water  ratio increasing
                                                       from water addition or formation water
                                                                       influx
     HPHT Fluid Loss           Increase                 Addition of base oil
                                                    Decrease in emulsifier concentration
                                                   Water present in filtrate
                              Decrease               Increase     in    primary    emulsifier
                                                            concentration
      Excess Lime               Increase                 Addition of lime
                                                           Anhydrite formation drilled
                              Decrease           CO2 or H2S kick
                                                             Additions of base oil or water

8.0  Formation Damage

      Formation damage can be caused by many mechanisms. Although some of these may be due
       to well conditions, the majority are caused by contamination of the formation by foreign
      substances not only during the drilling and completion phase but also during production and well
       servicing.

      Formation damage results in the reduction in productivity or injectivity of a reservoir.

     Causes of formation damage (mud related):
      •   Interaction between invading mud filtrate and reservoir fluid.
      •   Interaction between invading mud filtrate and reservoir rock constituents
      •   Interaction between mud solids and reservoir rock
          •   Particle plugging in reservoir pores
          •    Interstitial clays swelling
          •   Mobilisation, by filtrate invasion, of interstitial fines which then plug pores
      •   Inorganic scale formation due to incompatible mud filtrate and reservoir fluid.
      •   Reduction in relative permeability of reservoir in near wellbore area – flushed by filtrate
      •   Emulsion blocking – created by mixing of filtrate/ reservoir fluid

       Additional causes:
      •   Pores blocked with wax or asphaltenes
      •  Gas breakthrough and water coning reduces oil permeability
      •   Stress-induced permeability changes in near well-bore area
      •  Sand production – screen blocking

      Prevention is better than cure
     The prevention of formation damage should be a priority and the following steps considered:
      •   Ensure compatibility of mud  filtrate or completion  fluid with reservoir  fluid beforehand
          through lab testing. Prevent scale, emulsion blocking, precipitation. Maintain tight control
          over fluid loss during operations.
      •   Prevent excessive lost circulation in the reservoir section.
      •   Ensure that mud filtrate/ brine is sufficiently inhibited to prevent any interstitial clays from
           swelling.
      •   Ensure that any fluid invasion does not alter the water wet native state of the reservoir that is
        more conducive to higher oil permeability.
      •  To prevent solids plugging, tight control on filter loss during drilling is essential and solids-
           free clear brines during completion. This highlights both the importance of cleanliness and
          the need for brine filtration during completion phases.
      •   Avoidance of pressure surging in the reservoir to prevent losses/fluid invasion.

                                   Page 14 of 15                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 78 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
               DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

•   Liner cement recipes should be formulated with sufficient fluid loss control.
•   Prior to completion activities, ensure that the wellbore is clean e.g. total removal of any
    residual OBM when the completion is being run in solids-free brine. The use of detergent
   and scouring  pills is commonplace. Mechanical means using casing scrapers and wire
    brushes is also recommended along with riser/BOP jetting while functioning the rams.
•  The use of easily removable (acid soluble) plugging materials for control of losses should be
   mandatory e.g. calcium carbonate, oil soluble resin, sized salt.
•   Perforating should ideally be conducted underbalance and the wells flowed as soon after as
    possible to clean out any debris.
•   Control of sand production can be effected using screens and/or gravel packs instead of the
    conventional liner and cement job. Care is required not to damage the shroud around the
    screens while running them in.





                             Page 15 of 15                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 79 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

                    SECTION 5

                  CEMENTING


     Contents
1.0   Objectives                                                                   3
  1.1   Primary Cementing                                                          3
  1.2   Secondary or Remedial Cementing                                              3
2.0   Planning                                                                    3
3.0  Common Cementing Problems                                                   3
4.0   Cement Types                                                                3
5.0   Cement Properties                                                            4
  5.1    Yield                                                                      4
  5.2    Slurry Density                                                              4
  5.3   Mixwater                                                                  4
  5.4   Thickening Time (Pumpability)                                                 5
  5.5   Compressive Strength                                                        5
  5.6   Water Loss                                                                5
  5.7    Permeability                                                                5
6.0   Cement Additives                                                             5
  6.1    Accelerators                                                                6
  6.2   Retarders                                                                  6
  6.3   Density Reducing                                                            6
  6.4   Density Increasing                                                           6
  6.5    Fluid Loss Additive                                                           6
  6.6   Dispersants (Friction Reducing)                                                6
7.0   Cement Testing                                                               7
  7.1   Compressive Strength                                                        7
  7.2   Water Content                                                              7
  7.3   Thickening Time                                                            7
  7.4    Slurry Density                                                              8
  7.5   Water Loss                                                                8
  7.6    Permeability                                                                8
  7.7   Rheology                                                                  8
8.0   Spacers                                                                     8
  8.1   Spacer Characteristics                                                       8
9.0   Equipment                                                                   8
  9.1   Casing Shoe                                                               8
  9.2    Float Collar                                                                9
  9.3    Centralisers                                                                9
  9.4   Scratchers                                                                11
  9.5   Cement Heads                                                             11
  9.6   Cement Plugs                                                              12
10.0  Cementing Practices                                                          12
  10.1  Primary Cementing                                                         12
  10.2  Stage Cementing                                                           12
  10.3  Inner String Cementing                                                      13
  10.4  Liner Cementing                                                            13
  10.5  Squeeze Cementing                                                         13
    10.5.1  High Pressure Squeeze.                                                  14
    10.5.2  Low Pressure Squeeze                                                   14
    10.5.3  Running Squeeze                                                       14
    10.5.4   Hesitation Squeeze                                                      14
    10.5.5  Bradenhead Squeeze                                                    14
    10.5.6  Packer Squeeze                                                        14
  10.6  Cement Plugs                                                              15
    10.6.1  Plug Placement                                                         16
11.0  Evaluation of Cement Job                                                      16


                                   Page 1 of 22                            Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 80 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

12.0  Cementing Calculations                                                        18
  12.1  Example                                                                  18
  12.2  Useful Equations and Conversions                                             21





                                   Page 2 of 22                            Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 81 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

1.0  Objectives

1.1  Primary Cementing
      •      Isolation of casing shoe
      •      Isolation of production zones – prevent cross flow between intervals at different pressure
      •     Protection of water zones – prevent drilling fluid contamination of aquifers
      •      Isolation of problem interval – extreme losses, well control, side-tracking
      •     Protection of casing – from corrosive formation fluids e.g. H2S, CO2
      •     Casing support – e.g. support for conductor (load bearing – bending moments derived
           from supporting BOP/tree/riser and potential snag loads from fishing activities), prevent
            thermal buckling

1.2  Secondary or Remedial Cementing
       Additional cementing done at a later stage e.g. sealing off perforations, top up job on conductor,
       repair casing leaks, squeeze casing shoe, setting plugs, etc.

2.0  Planning

      Planning for a cement job consists of evaluating a number of features, including:
      •  Assessment of hole conditions (hole cleaning, size, washouts, temperature)
      •  Mud properties
      •   Slurry design
      •   Slurry placement
      •   Additional equipment (float equipment, centralisers, ECPs)

3.0 Common Cementing Problems

    Common problems that affect all cement jobs include:
      •   Poor hole condition (doglegs, borehole stability, washouts, hole fill, cuttings beds, etc.)
      •   Poor mud condition (high gel strengths and yield point, high fluid loss, thick filter cake, high
           solids content, lost circulation material, mud / cement incompatibility)
      •   Poor centralisation (cement not placed uniformly around the casing, leaving mud in place)
      •   Lost circulation
      •   Abnormal pressure
      •   Subnormal pressure
      •   High temperature

4.0  Cement Types

     API defines 9 different classes of cement (A to H) depending on the ratio of the four fundamental
      chemical components (C3S, C2S, C3A, C4AF where C = calcium, S = silicate , A = aluminate
     and F = fluoride)

      API Class               Mix water   Slurry  wt.  Depth ft      BHST °F
                                    gal / sx   ppg
     A (Portland)                  5.2        15.6       0 – 6000      80 - 170
     B (Portland)                  5.2        15.6       0 – 6000      80 - 170
     C (High Early)                6.3        14.8       0 – 6000      80 - 170
     D (Retarded)                 4.3        16.4     6000 – 10000   170 – 230
     E (Retarded)                 4.3        16.4     6000 – 10000   170 – 290
      F (Retarded)                 4.3        16.4    10000 – 16000  230 – 320
    G (Basic California)           5.0        15.8       0 – 8000     80 – 200
     H (Basic Gulf Coast)          4.3        16.4       0 – 8000      80 - 200


      Notes:
      Class A & B – Shallow depth use. Composition 50% C3S, 25% C2S, 10% C3A, 10% C4AF

                                   Page 3 of 22                            Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 82 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      Class C – Produces high early strength due to high C3S content
      Class D, E and F – Retarded cements due to coarse grind or inclusion of organic retarders
      (lignsulphonates)
      Class G and H – General purpose, compatible with most additives and able to be used over a
      wide range of temp and pressure. H coarser than G – better retarding in deeper wells.
      Class G is the most common type of cement used.

      Other common cement variants outwith API specification include:
     Pozmix cement – 50% Portland, 50% pozzolan (ground volcanic ash) and 2% bentonite
     Gypsum cement – mixture of Portland cement and gypsum. Used for remedial work.
      Diesel oil cement – “Gunk squeeze”. Mixture of basic cement with base oil used to seal off loss
      zones. Will set if water present.
       Silica flour – At temperatures above 230°F, cement will initially strengthen and then later weaken
     due to the subsequent formation of Dicalcium Silicate Hydrate (C2SH). By adding 30-40% silica
       flour to the cement, CSH forms in preference to C2SH thus extending the temperature range of
      the mix.

5.0  Cement Properties

5.1  Yield
     The yield of the cement, in cubic feet per sack, is the volume that will be occupied by the
      cement, mixwater and additives when the slurry is mixed.

          It will vary depending upon the cement class.

5.2  Slurry Density
    A standard mix comprising 5 gallons of water and 94lbs (1 sack) of cement will create a slurry
      with a density of 15.8 ppg.

     The slurry density is adjusted by varying either the mix water ratio or use of additives. Most slurry
       densities are within the range 11 – 18.5 ppg.
      Additives to adjust density include:

      Density reducing materials
      •   Bentonite (SG 2.65) – reduce a 15.8 ppg to a 12.6 ppg slurry with 12% bentonite
      •   Diatomaceous earth
      •   Gilsonite (SG 1.07)
      •   Pozzolan (SG 2.5) – 50:50 mix with 2% bentonite will create a 13.3 ppg slurry

      Density increasing materials
      •   Barytes (SG 4.25)
      •   Ilmenite (SG 4.6)
      •   Haematite (SG 5.02)

5.3  Mixwater
     The mix water ratios detailed above are dependent on:
      •     The need for a pumpable slurry
      •    A minimum amount of free water if allowed to stand / settle

     Reducing the mix water ratio has the following effect:
      •     Causes an increase in slurry density, compressive strength and viscosity
      •       Slurry becomes harder to pump
      •     Less volume of slurry is built per sack of cement used i.e. yield decreases

      During a typical cementing operation, a lead and tail slurry are often utilised. The difference
     between these is due to a reduction in the amount of mix water being used. An increase in water
      content for the  tail slurry will permit longer pumping and setting time but results in a lower


                                   Page 4 of 22                            Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 83 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      compressive strength and additional free water. The free water can be reused by the addition of
      bentonite in the slurry to bind the free water.

5.4  Thickening Time (Pumpability)
      Thickening time is the time available for a slurry to be mixed, pumped and displaced into the
      annulus before  it starts to thicken and set up. This time will depend on the additives used
       (retarders to increase time and accelerators to reduce time) and the conditions down hole (an
      increase in temperature, pressure and fluid loss will all reduce thickening time).

      Thickening time is determined during laboratory testing. The time to reach 100 Bearden Units
      (Bc) is recorded as the thickening time. Pumpability will normally cease at around 70Bc.

5.5  Compressive Strength
    A compressive strength of about 500psi minimum, including a safety factor, is felt necessary for
      supporting a casing string and withstand  differential pressures prior to  drilling ahead. For
      production casing or liner strings a compressive strength around 2000psi is often required for
       perforating.

     The waiting on cement (WOC) period enables the cement strength to develop fully. The time
      period is dependent on the bottom hole temperature, pressure, ratio of mix water and time
      elapsed since mixing. Accelerators (e.g. CaCl2) can reduce the WOC time to less than 3 hours.

5.6  Water Loss
     The cement setting process is the result of a chemical reaction resulting in dehydration. Thus, it
        is important that any water loss be controlled until the cement is in place to ensure that  it
      remains pumpable. The amount of water loss acceptable would depend on the type of job being
      conducted.

     Squeeze job – this would require a controlled water loss (typically 50 - 200mls) to enable cement
       slurry to be pumped into the perforations before a significant, impermeable  filter cake was
      created.
      Primary cementing – water loss is less critical and would typically be of the order 250 - 400mls.
      Liner job – fluid loss of around 50mls
      Horizontal hole – fluid loss less than 50mls

5.7  Permeability
     Once set, cement has a permeability of less than 0.1 millidarcy (tight sandstones are around 1-
     10  millidarcies). Disturbances during setting e.g. gas percolation or pressure testing, can
      increase this by several orders of magnitude.

6.0  Cement Additives

     Most cement slurries will contain some additives to improve the individual properties, depending
     on the job. Additives could be required to:
      •   Vary the slurry density
      •  Change the compressive strength
      •   Accelerate or retard setting time
      •   Control filtration and fluid loss
      •  Reduce slurry viscosity

     They may be in dry / granular or liquid form or may be blended in with the cement.

      Quantities of dry additives are usually expressed in terms of percentage by weight of cement (%
     BWOC). Liquid additives are usually expressed in terms of volume by weight of cement (gal / sx)
          .



                                   Page 5 of 22                            Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 84 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

        Type of Additive             Example                Typical Dowell Product
       Accelerator           CaCl2                     S1
                          NaCl                      D44
       Retarder               Calcium Lignsulphonate         D13, D81
                    CMHEC                       D8, D120
                               Saturated salt solution
       Density increase        Barytes                    D31
                             Haematite                  D76
       Density decrease        Bentonite                   D20
                               Diatomite                   D56
                             Pozzolan                   D61
        Friction reducer         Polymers
                             Calcium Lignsulphonate
        Fluid loss              Organic polymers                 Flac D59, Flac D60
                    CMHEC                   D8

6.1  Accelerators
     Reduce the WOC time (time to reach 500psi compressive strength).
     Used on shallow wells with low temperatures
    Common additives:
       Calcium Chloride 1.5 – 2.0%
      Sodium Chloride 2.0 – 2.5%
       Seawater
     These will act as retarders in higher concentrations.

6.2  Retarders
     Used on deeper sections where the higher temperatures promotes more rapid setting.
          If the static BHT is above about 260°F, the effect of the retarder should be measured by pilot
       testing.
       Calcium Lignosulphonates 0.1 – 1.5%
        Saturated salt solution

6.3  Density Reducing
     Used to reduce slurry weight where there is concern about exceeding fracture gradient.
      Also reduces the compressive strength and increases the thickening time.
      Allows more mix water to be used (creates greater slurry volume) – hence termed “extenders”
        Pre-hydrated bentonite 2 – 20% Reduce compressive strength and sulphate resistance.
       Pozzolan 50:50 mix with Portland cement Decrease in comp strength, increase in sulphate
        resistance
       Diatomaceous Earth 10 – 40%

6.4  Density Increasing
     Used when cementing in over-pressured zones
        Barytes BaSO4. Used for densities up to 18ppg
       Haematite Fe2O3 Densities up to 22ppg
       Graded Sand 40 – 60 mesh. Gives a 2ppg density increase

6.5  Fluid Loss Additive
     Used to prevent dehydration of slurry and premature setting. Also reduces free water.
       Carboxymethyl Hydroxyethyl Cellulose CMHEC 0.3 – 1%

6.6  Dispersants (Friction Reducing)
     Added to improve the flow properties. Reduces the viscosity enabling turbulent flow to be
      achieved at a lower circulating pressure – less chance of incurring losses.
       Polymers 0.3 – 0.5lbs/sx of cement

                                   Page 6 of 22                            Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 85 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

        Salt 1 – 16lbs/sx of cement
       Calcium Lignosulphonate 0.5 – 1.5lbs/sx

7.0  Cement Testing

     Cement recipes must be tested according to API 10 specifications.
         Initially, a formulation would be designed to suit the cement job proposed e.g. a surface hole
      (conductor) slurry would differ from a liner recipe in terms of its water loss requirements, setting
      time etc.

    A freshly mixed sample, comprising cement, mixwater and chemicals from the rig, would then
     be tested  in the  lab BEFORE the  actual  job takes place  to ensure  that there are no
      contamination problems. Since the test work requires a minimum 24 hours to complete,  it is
      important that fresh samples are despatched to the lab from the rig as soon as possible.

7.1  Compressive Strength
      This used to be the unconfined pressure required to crush a 2” cube of cement. A series of
     cement cubes would be made by using moulds and allowing to set. Periodically, one of the
     cubes would be removed and tested to destruction. A more recent test involves use of acoustic
     and ultra-sonic waves. The Ultrasonic Cement Analyser  (UCA) continuously monitors the
      strength development of a setting cement sample under simulated down-hole temperature and
      pressure conditions. A chart print out records the setting history.

7.2  Water Content
       Ideally, a cement slurry should have a viscosity (consistency) that will enable it to displace mud
       efficiently while permitting a strong bond to form between cement and casing. This means that
      the slurry should set without any free water forming. Free water is water that is squeezed out of
      the setting cement and creates pockets or a surface layer on the cement.

     Maximum water – will provide a set volume with 1.5% free water maximum. The free water is
      determined by allowing a sample of freshly mixed (20 mins) slurry to stand in a measured
       cylinder.

     Normal water – will provide a slurry that has a consistency of 11 Bc’s (Beardon units – units of
      consistency) after 20 mins of mixing.

     Minimum water – will provide a slurry with a consistency of 30 Bc’s after 20 mins mixing.

      Note: cement testing uses Beardon units for measuring viscosity because these are based on
      torque or drag.





7.3  Thickening Time
      This   is  measured  using  a  high  pressure/  high  temperature  thickening  time  tester
      (consistometer). It comprises a rotating cylindrical slurry container with a stationary paddle, the
     whole lot being enclosed within a pressure chamber. It is able to simulate well conditions with
     BHST’s up to 500°F and in excess of 25,000psi. The container with slurry rotates at a standard
       rate as the temperature and pressure are ramped up at a pre-determined rate. The torque
      created at the paddle shaft due to the setting cement  is measured on a  strip recorder.
      Pumpability  limit or thickening time  is reached when the slurry consistency reaches 70 –
      100Bc’s.





                                   Page 7 of 22                            Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 86 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

7.4  Slurry Density
      This is typically measured using a pressurised balance. A sample of cement is decanted into the
     sample chamber and a screw lid attached. Further slurry can be injected through the non-return
      valve in the cap using a hand pump. This subjects the slurry to sufficient pressure to eliminate
       errors due to entrapped air bubbles.

7.5  Water Loss
     The fluid loss test measures the filtrate generated over 30 minutes through a filter press dressed
      with a 325 mesh screen. The test can be conducted at 100 or 1000psi and at temperatures up to
      400°F and with either freshly mixed slurry or one that has been on the thickening tester for a
       while. With no additives, all neat cement slurries have a fluid loss in excess of 1000mls. With
      long chained polymer additives at concentrations of 0.6 to 1% by weight of cement (bwoc), the
        fluid loss can be reduced to 50-150mls.

7.6  Permeability
     Can be measured using a permeameter but generally is not a prime driver in designing a
     cement slurry.

7.7  Rheology
     Cement rheology is determined using a six speed rheometer equipped with the appropriate rotor
      sleeve, bob and torsion spring. After recording the dial readings corresponding to the six pre-set
       rotary speeds (600, 300, 200, 100, 6 and 3rpm), the various rheological parameters can be
      calculated – PV, YP, n and K values.

8.0  Spacers

      During displacement, the slurry will become contaminated in part with residual mud and filter
     cake from the drilling operation. The effect of contamination is to alter the various properties of
      the cement. The effects of contamination are minimised by pumping various spacers ahead of
      the main slurry.

       Prior to pumping any slurry, a series of chemical wash / spacers is usually pumped comprising
     base oil (for OBM), detergent washes, scavenger mud (to reclaim valuable drilling fluid) and a
       viscosified pill. The purpose of these spacers is to:

      •   Physically separate mud from cement – must be no compatibility problems
      •  Remove mud / wall cake from the annulus – turbulent flow regime preferred
      •  Leave the casing and formation water wet - surfactants
      •   Provide less hydrostatic head i.e. reduced pump pressures – oil or water

8.1  Spacer Characteristics
      •  Some fluid loss control and a shear-thinning characteristic (reduce pump pressures).
      •   Turbulent flow is the preferred regime to generate efficient displacement and erosion of wall
         cake
      •  A minimum contact time of 10 minutes is deemed sufficient and will determine the volume
        pumped
      •  Under laminar flow conditions, the density and frictional pressure loss of the spacer should
        be greater than that of the displaced fluid.

9.0  Equipment

9.1  Casing Shoe
     Run on the bottom of the casing string. Rounded profile to assist when running into open hole.
     Known as a float shoe if run with a ball or poppet valve.


                                   Page 8 of 22                            Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 87 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

9.2  Float Collar
      Usually placed 2 or 3 joints above the shoe and acts as a stop for the cement plugs. The float
       collar ensures that there will be cement sealing the last few joints of casing when pumping
     ceases  i.e. when the plug  is “bumped”. Some  drilling programmes permit an  additional
      displacement of up to half the shoe track in an attempt to correct for pump efficiency error and
      observe a plug bump. This also minimises the volume of cement to be drilled afterwards.
     The float collar also contains a ball valve, which prevents the cement in the annulus from flowing
     back into the casing when the displacement has finished. A flow (or backflow) test is conducted
       after pumping to confirm that  it is holding. When running casing, since the float will prevent
      back-flow, it is usual to have to periodically fill the casing (every 5 joints). Failure to do this can
      lead to a collapsed casing string.

9.3  Centralisers
     These are either of the hinged metal rib variety or the solid spiral body type and both serve to
       centralise the casing in the hole.

     Advantages of centralised pipe:
         -   Improved displacement efficiency (minimal eccentricity)
         -   Reduced differential sticking risk
         -   Prevent key seating problems
         -   Reduced drag in directional wells


          Fig 1 - Influence of Standoff on Mud Removal

                             100% Stand-off (Centred)
                1.0


                                    75%
                0.8                        Velocity
            Avg.                              50%
   /  0.6
      Wn
      in                                      33 1/3%
                        Velocity  0.4

                0.2



                      3              8      10     15      20      40     60      80
                              Rate of flow (bpm)

                     9.5/8" Casing in 12¼" Hole





                                   Page 9 of 22                            Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 88 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
               DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE




      Fig 2 - Effects of Stand-off on Mud Displacement





                                                     Mud





                         Cement





                                         Decreasing Stand-off

The centralisers are clamped to the casing using a hinge and pin mechanism whilst a stop collar
serves to locate them in position. Spacing and quantity of centralisers is dependent on hole
angle, casing weight, mud weight. The suppliers can provide an optimum spacing programme
utilising API’s recommended stand-off criteria. Typically, the centralisers might be concentrated
on the critical, higher angle sections, the shoe and just below the hanger whilst the remainder of
the casing would have them spaced very sporadically.

         Fig 3 - Stand-off




                      R2



                   R1


                    W

       % Stand-off = W x 100
                    R2 - R1





                             Page 10 of 22                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 89 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

9.4  Scratchers
     Wire brushes that can be clamped onto the casing and secured with stop collars. Used to
       physically dislodge wall cake, gelled mud and other debris.

9.5  Cement Heads
     The cement head connects the discharge line from the cement unit to the top of the casing.

      For a full bore application, the casing is run back to the rig floor and the plugs are loaded into the
      surface cement head. Launching involves removing the retainer and pumping the plug down
       hole.

      For a subsea system, the casing is run and landed on drill pipe while the plugs are stored in a
      special plug basket under the casing hanger. The plugs are launched by dropping either a dart
      or nitrile ball which seats in the plug and allows it to be pumped down.

     Subsea Cement System





                                   Page 11 of 22                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 90 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

9.6  Cement Plugs
     Cement plugs are used to separate the cement slurry from the spacer or mud and prevent
      contamination. On long casing strings additional plugs are pumped ahead of and between the
      spacer train to minimise contamination caused by different flow regimes within the different
      spacers and to maximise their effectiveness when they exit into the annulus.

      Plugs are normally manufactured out of rubber. Various proprietary devices are used to “lock”
      plugs together to make them easier to drill out (often termed PDC drillable).

     The bottom plug has a thin diaphragm in it’s centre. After  it lands out on the float collar, the
     diaphragm ruptures when a pre-determined differential pressure  is reached.  It  is normally
     dropped ahead of the spacer or cement.
     The bottom plug has a solid centre.

10.0 Cementing Practices

10.1 Primary Cementing
      •   Ensure that a computer simulation of the cement job has been performed to establish
        minimum and maximum flowrates and ECDs.
      •   Condition the mud to reduce rheology (YP, gels) prior to final trip out to run casing.
      •   Confirm that the plugs are correctly placed in cement head – bottom (diaphragm) plug below
          top (solid) plug
      •  Run the casing in until a few feet off bottom. Break circulation if required on the way in.
      •   Circulate at least one casing volume to ensure that there is nothing to plug the shoe and to
        remove any trip gas.
      •  Pump spacers, release bottom plug and pump cement slurry (lead and tail).
      •   Release top plug, clear cement line and begin to displace.
      •   Displacement rate should be altered depending upon what is in the annulus (mud, spacer or
         cement). Most spacers and cement require turbulent flow  (if possible) to maximise mud
         removal and reduce mud contamination.
      •  When the bottom plug reaches the float collar, the diaphragm should rupture allowing
          continued pumping
      •  The displacement volume to land the top plug should have been calculated previously.
      •   Displacement rate should be reduced as plug bump is approached to prevent excessive
          pressures and any shock as plug lands.
      •     If no bump is seen,  it is common practice to further displace up to half of the shoe track
          (note that some operators have adopted a pump till bump philosophy).
      •    All mud returns should be closely monitored throughout for losses, which could be evidence
           of fracturing formation.
      •     If losses are observed, the displacement rate can be adjusted to reduce the ECD  i.e.
          annular pressure losses.
      •  The plug should be bumped with about 1000psi differential having first confirmed that the
          casing burst pressure less safety margin would not be exceeded.
      •     If required the pressure can be increased at this point and a casing pressure test performed
          (note it is necessary to confirm the pressure rating of all components before performing this
            test)
      •  The pressure should then be bled off to confirm that the float valve is functioning and
          supporting the differential back pressure due to heavy cement in the annulus.

10.2 Stage Cementing
     Used  in applications where long sections of casing require cementing but concerns exist
     because of:
      •  Long pumping times
      •   High pump pressures
      •   Excessive hydrostatic pressure due to column of cement – exceed fracture gradient

       First stage
     Repeat of primary cementing operation above.

                                   Page 12 of 22                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 91 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


     Second stage
      This necessitates the inclusion of a DV collar in the original casing string at a pre-determined
      depth. The first stage places cement in the annulus from the bottom up to the DV collar. The
      ports on the DV collar can then be opened by dropping a special dart (bomb) and shearing the
       retaining pins (1000-1500psi). Circulation is then established through the DV collar. The above
      primary cementing procedure can then be repeated but without any pipe reciprocation. Further
      stages could be included if necessary.

10.3 Inner String Cementing
      Conventional cementing approach with large diameter casing will result in:
      •   Large displacement volumes
      •   Extended displacement duration
      •   Significant volume of cement remaining in shoe track

     As an alternative, the casing can be cemented through tubing or drill pipe. A special float shoe is
     used which allows the drill pipe to stab in providing a hydraulic seal. The casing is run as normal
     and then the inner string is run and stabbed into the float shoe. The cement job proceeds as
      before using smaller drill pipe plugs. After displacement and confirmation that the float shoe is
      holding back the differential pressure, the pipe can be retrieved.

     Care needs to be taken with  this technique as the possibility of collapsing the casing  is
       significantly increased.

10.4 Liner Cementing
    A liner string usually comprises a shoe and float collar as with larger casings along with a liner
      hanger (hydraulic or mechanically set) to secure the upper end. The entire assembly is run on
         drill pipe and then the hanger set typically 300-500ft within the previous casing. Once set, mud is
       circulated to ensure an obstruction free cementing path around the liner. Prior to cementing, the
      running tool is backed off the liner hanger to guarantee removal of the drill pipe afterwards.

      Liner cement recipes usually contain extra additives for fluid loss control, retarding, possible gas
      blocking etc. Since the mix proportions are critical and there is no lead slurry, it is usually batch
     mixed prior to the job. This guarantees the quality and density throughout the job.

    A typical liner cementation operation would proceed as below:
      •   Position liner at required depth
      •   Circulate bottoms up – ensure low rheology (minimal YP and gels); rotate liner
      •   Set liner hanger
      •   Release setting tool and slack off weight (10-20Klbs)
      •  Pump spacer
      •   Pressure test surface lines
      •  Pump pre-mixed slurry
      •   Release plug
      •  Pump spacer
      •   Displace cement out of liner into annulus – rotate liner if possible
      •  Pump down plug releases liner wiper plug
      •   Both plugs pumped down liner until they latch into landing collar
      •  Bump plugs with 1000psi
      •   Bleed off and check for back-flow
      •   Pick up, position tail pipe at top of liner and circulate excess cement out from above liner




10.5 Squeeze Cementing
     Use of hydraulic pressure to force cement into an annulus or formation. Usual applications:


                                   Page 13 of 22                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 92 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      •   Seal off gas or water producing zones to improve production
      •   Repair casing failures
      •   Seal off lost zones
      •   Remedial work on primary cement jobs e.g. top up jobs
      •   Prevent vertical reservoir fluid migration into production zone
      •   Prevent fluids escaping from abandoned zones

     To pump cement into a formation, a permeability of 500darcies would be required. Since this
     does not occur normally, use several techniques to compensate.

10.5.1 High Pressure Squeeze.
      •   Formation  is broken down  first and then cement  is squeezed (dense, impermeable
          formations preferred.
      •  Use solids-free fraccing fluid. Mud filter cake build up would prevent fraccing.
      •   Since the overburden generally provides the maximum principal stress (acting vertically),
           fractures initiated would be vertically oriented i.e. pushing the rock apart horizontally against
          the direction of the minimum principal stress
      •  Once fracturing had occurred, cement would be spotted against the fracture zone and then
        pumped away into the formation after closing in the well.
      •  The injection pressure should gradually rise as the cement fills up the fractures.

10.5.2 Low Pressure Squeeze
      •  Here the pressure always remains below fracture pressure.
      •   Perforations should be flushed clean – free from mud and other plugging materials.
      •  An injectivity test using water should be conducted first to confirm feasibility of a squeeze.
      •  A build up of pressure would force fluid from the cement into the pores leaving a filter cake
           to form on the surface gradually inhibiting the process.
      •  As the injection process ceases in one location, it can commence at a different site and will
          continue until an impenetrable seal has blocked off the loss zone.
      •   Fluid loss additives are important. The use of neat cement alone would result in dehydration
           of the slurry due to the high fluid loss of neat cement. This in turn would create bridging
          before all the permeable zone could be sealed.
      •   Preferred slurry properties: fluid loss 5—200mls; water: solids ratio of 0.4 by weight

10.5.3 Running Squeeze
      •  Cement is pumped slowly and continuously until final pressure obtained. Used for repairing
        damaged casing.

10.5.4 Hesitation Squeeze
      •  Pumping is stopped periodically to allow the slurry to dehydrate and create a filter cake.
          Usually pumping in increments of 0.25-0.5bbls every 10-15 minutes.

10.5.5 Bradenhead Squeeze
      •  Cement is pumped through drillpipe/ stinger (no packer), spotted and squeezed after closing
          the BOP’s.
      •   Since the cement can not move up the annulus, it is forced into any loss zones.
      •  Low pressure squeeze option
      •    Difficult to place cement accurately
      •   Cannot be used for selectively squeezing perforations
      •  As the casing is pressured up, restricted by burst specification.

10.5.6 Packer Squeeze
      •   Packer enables cement squeeze to be more accurately targeted
      •   Since the annulus is sealed off, can use higher pressures (not limited by casing burst).

                                   Page 14 of 22                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 93 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      •   Setting depth important – too high and cement contaminated with mud and excess fluid
        pumped into formation before cement. Too low – risk of cementing packer in.
      •   Packer normally set 30-50ft above zone of interest with or without a tailpipe.
          •   Drillable packer (e.g. Halliburtons EZSV or Fasdril)
              •   Single use only
              •  Back pressure valve prevents back-flow after squeezing
          •   Retrievable packer
              •   Multiple use
              •     If back-flow occurs after releasing packer, re-set and apply squeeze again.

10.6 Cement Plugs
     These are used to   fill a section of hole and prevent movement of  fluids  within. Typical
       applications are:
      •   Abandoning depleted zones
      •   Seal off lost circulation zones
      •   Provide a kick-off platform for side-tracks
      •   Isolating a zone for formation testing
      •   Abandoning an entire well – provision of barriers (Government regulations specify that plugs
          are required to seal off production zones, aquifers etc)



                                                                                                             Surface hole                             Surface plug




                                                                                                             Surface casing



                                                                                                              Primary cement                           Surface casing
                                                                                                                                                                      ptoective plug

 Cement plug spotted and
 timed to DRIFT into Loss
 Zone as slurry thickens                             Open hole cement plug to
                                                                 protect against hydraulic
                                                                   fracture below desired
                                                           casing seat



                                                                                         Non productive hole
 Loss Circulation Zone


                                                                    Sealing Casing Seat
              Combating Lost Circulation

                                                                                                                                                                                   Isolation plug #2
                                                                                             Top of cut casing                                in top of cut
                                                                                                                                                         casing
                                                                                                                 Production casing

                                                                                                  Bit is walked off cement plug                                  Primary cement
                                                                                             into softer formation to                                                                                              Isolation plug #1
                                                                                    sidetrack well bore                                                                                              to seal
                                                                                                                                                                        perforations
                                                                                                                   Perforated interval



                                                                                                             Plugging & Abandoning


                                                                             Firm cement plug set in
                                                                      open hole for:
                                                                                             1. Unrecoverable junk
                                                                                             2. Undesirable direction
                                                                                             3. Poor structural position





                                                  Sidetracking
     The biggest problem setting plugs is mud contamination which can be minimised by:
      •  Use a gauge section of hole
      •  Use a plug volume sufficient to allow for some contamination  - typically 500ft height

                                   Page 15 of 22                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 94 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      •   Condition the mud beforehand
      •  Use a pre-flush ahead of the cement
      •  Use a weighted slurry which contains less water

10.6.1 Plug Placement
     Balanced plug – attempt to displace sufficient cement out of the drillpipe such that the column of
     cement in both pipe and annulus are of equal height. The  drill pipe or stinger can then be
      withdrawn leaving the plug in place.

      Bridge plug – this can be set on depth and a 500ft cement plug spotted above it. This method
      gives better depth control and reduced risk of contamination.

      Dual plug – setting an initial balanced plug which can then be tagged to give a reference base
     upon which a second plug can be spotted (height of plug dependent on position of initial plug.

      Note: When setting a series of cement plugs,  it is advisable to pump a wiper dart or ball after
     each plug to ensure that the pipe/ stinger does not become plugged itself with cement.

11.0 Evaluation of Cement Job

    A cement job has failed and will require remedial work if any of the following situations exist:
      •  The cement does not fill the annulus to the required height
      •  The cement does not provide a seal at the shoe
      •  The cement does not isolate undesirable formations

     The effectiveness of the job (and hence the need for additional work) can be measured by
      various means:

     Temperature survey – running a thermometer inside the casing to detect the top of cement. The
      hydration process of setting cement is exothermic (gives out heat) and is detectable from within
      the casing.

      Radiation log – radioactive tracers can be added to the cement before it is pumped (Carnolite an
      example).

     Cement bond log (CBL) – this is a sonic log capable of both detecting the top of cement and
      determining the quality of the cement sheath. It is run on wire-line, emits sonic signals and must
     be centralised to yield credible results. These pass out through the casing and are picked up by
     a receiver some 3 ft away. Both the transit time and amplitude of the signal are used to indicate
      the cement bond quality. Since the speed of sound is greater in casing than in the formation or
     mud, the first signals to return are those of the casing. If the amplitude of this signal (E1) is
       large, this indicates that the pipe is free (poor bond). When cement is firmly bonded to the
      casing and formation, the signal is attenuated (weakened) and is characteristic of the formation
      behind the casing. The signal can also indicate where the cement is bonded to the casing but
      not the formation. The effect of channelling can also be detected.





                                   Page 16 of 22                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 95 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
               DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE



                 T





                                                        FORMATION

  3ft





                                                                SHORTEST PATH
               R                                LONGEST PATH


                         Schematic of CBL Tool





The CBL usually gives an amplitude curve and a Variable Density Log (VDL) which indicates the
strength of the signals by the intensity of dark and light streaks. The casing signals show up as
parallel lines. A good bond is demonstrated by wavy lines. There is no standard API scale to
measure the effectiveness of the CBL and many factors can result in false interpretations:

•   During the setting process, the velocity and amplitude of the signals varies significantly. It is
   recommended that the CBL is not run until 24-36 hours after the cement job to give realistic
    results.
•  Cement composition affects signal transmission.
•  The thickness of the cement sheath will cause changes in the attenuation of the signal.

                             Page 17 of 22                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 96 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


     The CBL will react to the presence of a micro-annulus (a small gap between the casing and
      cement). This usually heals with time and is not a critical factor. Some Operators recommend
      running a CBL under pressure to eliminate this effect (the casing will balloon out under pressure
     and occupy any micro-annulus).

     One of the limitations of the CBL is that it only gives a one dimensional view if the cement bond
       at a given depth. An alternative tool that can be run is the Cement Evaluation Tool (CET) which
     uses ultrasonic transducers and the principles of casing thickness resonance to give a full radial
       picture of the cement bond around the full circumference of the casing. This is extremely useful
       in identifying  if a channel is present and, on directional wells, the exact orientation of this
      channel.

12.0 Cementing Calculations

     The principal calculations required for a cement job are:
      •  The amount of slurry required to  fill the annulus outside the casing to the programmed
           height.
      •  The amount of mud needed to pump to displace the cement i.e. bump the top plug.

       In all cement calculations, it is necessary to know the yield per sack of the cement being used to
     be able to confirm that sufficient material is on site for the job (including contingency). The
       yield/sack depends on the amount of additives in the cement and the required final slurry
       density.

     Schematics are invaluable in clarifying the volumes required including details regarding annular
      capacities (open hole and cased hole), different grade casings, section lengths etc.

12.1 Example
    A 7” liner is to be set as per the attached schematic.


                      RTE



                      5" 19.5 lb ft DP
                                                              9.5/8" 47 lb ft Casing

                                              Top of liner @ 10,555ft

                                                   Wiper Plug @ 10,579ft



                                                            9.5/8 shoe @ 11,050ft

                                         12¼ open hole @ 11,070ft



                                                          7" 29 lb ft liner


                                              8½" open hole


                                                            Float collar @ 13,040ft

                                                            Float shoe @ 13,125ft




      Calculate the following:

                                   Page 18 of 22                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 97 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
               DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

•     The amount of water per sack required to give a 16 ppg slurry
•     The yield in cuft / sack
•     The slurry volume required
•     The tonnage of cement blend required
•     The mud displacement to latch the wiper plug
•     The mud displacement to bump the plug
•      Required thickening time

Assume the following:
−  30% open hole excess volume
−   Static bottom hole temperature 270ºF
−   Slurry formulation
   −   Class G + 35% BWOC Silica Flour
   −  D603 @ 0.4 gallons per sack
   −  D109 @ 0.09 gallons per sack
   −   Freshwater

Note:
BWOC = by weight of cement
D603 is a liquid fluid loss additive
D109 is a high temperature liquid retarder
Freshwater is used as the mix water as seawater would accelerate the thickening time

Calculations
The amount of water per sack required to give a 16 ppg slurry
Using a variation of the equation density = mass / volume it is possible to calculate the amount
of water required.
First it is necessary to calculate the combined weight and volume of the slurry’s components per
sack of dry cement.
This is best done in tabular form as shown below

     Material       Weight (lbs)       Absolute      Volume (gal)
                              Volume (gal /
                                                   lb)
 Cement               94             0.0382            3.59
 Silica Flour            32.9            0.0456            1.50
 D603                    3.6             0.110             0.40
 D109                    0.9             0.096             0.09
 Water            Y / 0.12            0.12           Y
 TOTAL           131.4 + Y / 0.12                        5.58 + Y

From cementing tables (example Halliburton Red Book – Technical Data, Physical Properties of
Cementing  Materials and Admixtures) read  off  the absolute volume  for  all  the  slurry’s
components.

One sack of cement weight 94 lbs
35% BWOC silica flour weights 35% x 94 lbs = 32.9 lbs

All of the figures in black are taken from the slurry formulation

All of the figures in blue are calculated by dividing the volume by the absolute volume to give
weight

All of the figures in red are calculated by multiplying the weight by the absolute volume to give
the volume.

Y is the amount of water required.

So for a 16 ppg slurry the totals can be represented as:


                             Page 19 of 22                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 98 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
               DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

        16    =      131.4 + Y / 0.12
                           5.58 + Y

Re-arranging this gives

16 x (5.58 + Y)  =      131.4 + 8.33Y
       Y     =      5.49 gal / sack

The yield in cuft / sack
The yield is the volume of slurry obtained by mixing 1 sack of cement with the specified additives
and mix water, expressed in cuft /sack of cement.

This is the total volume from the table above converted from gallons to cubic feet.
Hence   Yield = (5.58 + 5.49) gal x 0.1337 cuft / gal
          Yield = 1.48 cuft / sack

The slurry volume required
The slurry volume required is the sum of the following:
•  Shoe track volume
•   Liner / 8½” open hole volume
•   Liner / 12¼” open hole volume
•  Open hole excess
•   Liner / casing volume

Cementing tables are invaluable for these calculations as they have capacities and volumes pre-
calculated.

Shoe track volume      = (13,135 ft – 13,040 ft) x 0.0371 bbl / ft
                    = 3.15 bbl
Liner / 8½” volume      = (13,135 ft – 11,070 ft) x 0.0226 bbl / ft
                    = 46.67 bbl
Liner / 12¼” volume     = (11,070 ft – 11,050 ft) x 0.0982 bbl / ft
                    = 1.96 bbl
Open hole excess      = (46.67 bbl + 1.96 bbl) x 0.3
                    = 14.59 bbl
Liner / casing volume    = (11,050 ft – 10,555 ft) x 0.0256 bbl / ft
                    = 12.67 bbl

TOTAL VOLUME       = 3.15 + 46.67 + 1.96 + 14.59 + 12.67 bbl
                    = 79.04 bbl or 443.8 cu ft

The tonnage of cement blend required
The tonnage of cement blend is calculated by first working out the total number of sacks of
cement required (total slurry volume divided by the yield), converting to a tonnage and then
adding 35% (to allow for the silica flour)

Sacks of cement required       = 443.8 cu ft / 1.48 cu ft / sack
                          = 300 sacks

Tonnage of cement required     = 300 sacks x 94 lbs / sack / 2205 lbs / metric ton
                          = 12.79 tons of cement

Tonnage of blend required      = 12.79 tons x 1.35
                          = 17.27 tons

Knowing the total number of sacks of cement required,  it is now possible to calculate the total
quantities of additives required, the number of tanks of mix fluid required (including an allowance
for any dead space).





                             Page 20 of 22                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 99 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

     The mud displacement to latch the wiper plug
     The mud displacement to latch the wiper plug is simply the volume of the drillpipe to the wiper
       plug.

     Remember to use an average ID of the drillpipe (by calipering a number of joints and taking the
      average ID and make an allowance for the tooljoint internal upset). Do not assume that the
       drillpipe capacity is as per the quoted tables. This is especially important when setting balanced
     cement plugs.

      For this example a DP capacity of 0.0179 bbl / ft is assumed.
     Volume to latch wiper plug      = 10,579 ft x 0.0179 bbl / ft
                               = 189.4 bbl

      For liner cement jobs the ability to observe the drill pipe dart latching the liner wiper plug is a
      useful tool in allowing a re-computation of the total displacement volume if required.

     The mud displacement to bump the plug
     The mud displacement to bump the plug is the capacity of the liner from the wiper plug to the
        float collar.

     Volume to bump plug    = (13,040 ft – 10,579 ft) x 0.0371 bbl / ft
                         = 91.3 bbl

     Required thickening time
     The required thickening time is the total time to mix, pump and displace the slurry. Some
      assumptions are required, but  it is always useful to perform this check and compare it against
      the thickening time determined from the laboratory test.  If there is insufficient or too much
      thickening time, then a new slurry formulation is required.

     Assuming the following:
       Slurry mix rate of 3 barrels per minute
      Displacement rate of 8 barrels per minute
      Contingency of 30 minutes (allowing for breakdowns, problems with bulk cement delivery)

      Required thickening time       = Total slurry volume divided by 3 +
                                          Total displacement volume divided by 8 + 30 minutes
                               = (79.04 / 3) + [(189.4 + 91.3) / 8] + 30
                               = 92 minutes

     The slurry mix rate should be determined for the actual cement unit in use and the displacement
       rate should be modified, according to the displacement schedule calculated to ensure optimum
      displacement efficiency. A minimum displacement rate should be determined  if losses are
      encountered and the displacement rate is reduced.





12.2 Useful Equations and Conversions
      Cubic Feet                  = Barrels x 5.6146
      Gallons                    = Cubic Feet x 7.4805
      Gallons                    = Barrels x 42
      Barrels per Linear Foot         = (D2 – d2) x 0.0009714
      Cubic Feet per Linear Foot      = (D2 – d2) x 0.005454

     where       D     = diameter of hole or inside diameter of largest casing in inches

                                   Page 21 of 22                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 100 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
               DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

              d     = outside diameter of casing or liner being cemented in inches

1 bag of cement              = 94 lbs
1 bag of cement              = 1 cubic foot





                             Page 22 of 22                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 101 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

                   SECTION 6

                    DRILL BITS


Contents
1.0    Bit Selection                                                                   3
2.0    Roller Cone Bits                                                                3
  2.1    Roller Cone Bit Features                                                       3
     2.1.1   The Cutters                                                              4
     2.1.2   Cone Offset                                                              5
     2.1.3   The Bearings                                                             6
  2.2   Tricone Bit Selection                                                          6
  2.3   The IADC Roller Cone Bit Classification System                                     7
3.0   Fixed Cutter Bits                                                               9
  3.1   Fixed Cutter Bit Types                                                         9
     3.1.1   PDC Bits                                                                9
     3.1.2    Natural Diamond Bits                                                      9
     3.1.3   TSP Bits                                                                9
     3.1.4   Impregnated Diamond Bits                                                  9
  3.2  PDC Bit Technology                                                          10
     3.2.1     Bit Nomenclature                                                         10
     3.2.2   PDC Bit Cutting Action                                                    11
  3.3  PDC Cutter Technology                                                       12
     3.3.1   The PDC Cutter                                                          12
     3.3.2    Cutter Density                                                           13
     3.3.3    Cutter Size                                                              13
     3.3.4    Cutter Distribution                                                        13
     3.3.5    Cutter Orientation                                                        14
     3.3.6    Cutter Design - General                                                   14
     3.3.7    Cutter Geometry                                                         15
  3.4   Fixed Cutter Bit Applications and Design Characteristics                             16
     3.4.1   High Rotary Speeds                                                      16
     3.4.2    Slimhole Drilling                                                          17
     3.4.3    Directional and Horizontal Drilling                                            17
     3.4.4    Bi-Centric and Eccentric Bit Designs                                         18
  3.5   Fixed Cutter Bit Classification                                                  19
4.0    Bit Handling and Make-up Procedures                                             19
5.0    Bit Running Procedures                                                         20
  5.1    Roller Cone Bits                                                             20
     5.1.1   Running in                                                              20
     5.1.2    Establish a bottom hole pattern                                              20
     5.1.3    Before re-running green bits                                                20
  5.2   Fixed Cutter Bits                                                             20
     5.2.1    Preparation                                                             20
     5.2.2   Running the bit (rotary assembly)                                            21
     5.2.3   Running the bit (PDM & turbine)                                             21
  5.3    Drill-Off Tests                                                               21
     5.3.1     Drill-Off Test Procedure                                                    21
  5.4    Drilling Out Float and Shoe Equipment                                           22
6.0    Bit Related Drilling Dynamics                                                     22
  6.1    Axial Vibrations                                                              22
  6.2    Lateral Vibrations                                                            22
  6.3    Torsional Vibrations and Slip-Stick                                               25
     6.3.1    Prediction and Monitoring of Downhole Vibrations                               26


                                   Page 1 of 33                              Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 102 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

7.0    Drilling Problem Identification                                                     26
  7.1    Differential Pressure                                                          26
  7.2    Circulating Pressure                                                          26
  7.3   Torque                                                                    27
  7.4    Penetration Rate (ROP)                                                       27
8.0    Dull Bit Grading                                                               28
  8.1   IADC Dull Grading System                                                     28
     8.1.1    Cutter / Cutting Structure Wear                                              28
     8.1.2    Roller Cone Bit Location Codes                                             29
     8.1.3    Fixed Cutter Bit Location Codes                                             29
    IADC Dull Grading Codes                                                         30
     8.1.5   The Gauge                                                             31
  8.2   Used Bit Conditions / Causes / Remedies Tables                                   31
     8.2.1    Roller Cone Bits                                                         31
     8.2.2    Fixed Cutter Bits                                                         32
9.0    Bit Run Economics                                                             32





                                   Page 2 of 33                              Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 103 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


1.0  Bit Selection

       Bit performance is measured by the total length and time drilled before the bit has to be pulled and
      replaced. Minimum cost per metre (or foot) is the primary objective. Careful review of offset well
      data must be undertaken when selecting a bit for any particular hole section.

      Primary considerations when selecting bit type are:

      •   Geology
        −   Formation properties
              •   Compressive strength
                 Refers to the intrinsic strength of the rock which is based upon its composition, method
                     of deposition and compaction.    It is important to consider the 'confined' or  'in situ'
                 compressive strength of a given formation. Many bit manufacturers now provide a
                 supplementary rock strength analysis service as an aid to bit selection.
              •    Elasticity
                    Affects the way in which a rock fails. A rock that fails in a plastic mode will deform
                    rather than fracture.
              •   Abrasiveness
              •   Overburden pressure
                   Affects the amount of compaction of sediments and therefore the rock hardness.
              •    Stickiness
              •   Pore pressure
                   Affects mud weight requirements which, in turn, can affect penetration rates.
              •    Porosity and permeability
        −  Formation changes within a given hole section
           Changes in formation during one bit run can have a significant effect upon bit performance.
           The formations to be drilled and the prognosed depths of formation changes will be given in
              the drilling program and will form the basis of bit selection. It is important to remember the
               difference between exploration and appraisal/development drilling in that:
              •   For appraisal/development  drilling much  will be known about the properties of the
                prognosed formations and bit selection will be based upon offset bit performance along
                   with electric log data ( sonic, gamma ray etc), mud log data, core samples etc.
              •   For exploration drilling little may be known of the drillability of the formations that are
                      likely to be encountered and so a more conservative bit program will be developed. In
                such situations  it is prudent to load out a wider variety of bit designs to cover  all
                    eventualities.
      •   Hole size and casing program
      •   Directional profile of well path and steerability of bit design
      •   Drive type (Rotary / Rotary Steerable / Mud Motor / Turbine)
      •    Drilling Fluid Properties
      •   Hydraulics
      •   Rig capabilities

2.0  Roller Cone Bits

      Three-cone rock  bits, or  roller cone  bits, were  first introduced in the 1930’s by Hughes Tool
     Company. Roller cone bits are comprised of steel cutters mounted on the bit body in such a manner
      they are free to rotate. Most rock bits have three cones, although designs using two and four cones
     do exist.
2.1  Roller Cone Bit Features
     Rock bits have three main elements
      •   Cutters (or cones)

                                   Page 3 of 33                              Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 104 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      •   Bearings
      •   Bit body.





                             Courtesy of Reed-Hycalog



2.1.1 The Cutters
     The cutting elements on a rock bit are circumferential rows of teeth extending from each cone and
        interfitting between rows of teeth on the adjacent cones. These are either machined out of the cone
       steel forgings (milled tooth  bits), or are pre-manufactured from harder tungsten carbide and
     assembled in pockets machined into the cones (insert bits). Tungsten carbide insert bits were
       originally designed to drill extremely hard and/or abrasive formations such as chert and quartzite,
      which were unsuitable for drilling with softer formation milled tooth designs. However, because of
       their superior durability, there are now also insert bit designs suitable for drilling softer formations
      economically.  The teeth can be a variety of shapes and sizes, depending on the intended
       application, and are responsible for actually crushing or gouging the formation as the bit rotates.
     The crushing comes from the high weight on bit used driving the teeth into the rock as the cones
     and bit rotate.





                                   Page 4 of 33                              Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 105 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

       Roller Cone Bit Cutting Action





                   Courtesy of Reed-Hycalog


2.1.2 Cone Offset
     The gouging action of a tricone bit is the result of offsetting the cones on the bit so that they do not
       rotate about their true centres. Offset is the horizontal distance between the centre line of the bit
     and a vertical plane through the centre line of the journal. The degree of offset is referred to as
      skew.  If the cones are forced to rotate about an axis other than their true, geometrical axis of
       rotation, they will slide or drag along the hole bottom occasionally, thereby producing a drag cutting
     mechanism in addition to the crushing system. In general, the greater the offset distance on the bit,
      the higher the degree of gouging/scraping cutting action it has. Softer formation rock bits have more
       offset than those bits designed to drill hard rock, where there may actually be no offset at all and the
        bit removes formation purely by a crushing action.





                                                  Cone offset





                                   Page 5 of 33                              Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 106 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


2.1.3 The Bearings
     The bearings allow the cones to rotate about the bit body. Bearings for premium oilfield rock bits are
      sealed and lubricated, to ensure longer life in the harsh downhole environment. Non-sealed roller
       ball bearings are produced and are primarily used for top-hole sections where trip time is short and
      high rotary speeds are desirable. The most common premium rock bit bearing today, however, is
      the sealed journal bearing. This contains no rollers, just a solid journal pin mated to the inside
      surface of the cone or a bushing, which fits between the cone and journal.

          It is designed so that all the bearing elements are uniformly loaded and high weights on bit and
       rotary speeds can be used. A sealed reservoir of lubricant is held within the bit body to lubricate the
      bearing.





                             Courtesy of Reed-Hycalog


2.2  Tricone Bit Selection
       In many cases roller cone drill bits can be run in the same applications where fixed cutter bits,
       primarily PDC bits, are run, particularly premium large diameter tooth type motor bits and high
     speed premium insert bits (some of which incorporate metal seals). Roller cone bits, in general, drill
      slower than PDC bits and have a shorter life in terms of footage that can be drilled. However, on a
      per bit basis they are priced lower than PDC bits. The choice of which type of bit to run often
     depends on the results of a cost per foot analysis.

     The following basic guidelines should be used as an aid to roller cone bit selection
      •  Shale has a better drilling response to RPM.
      •  Limestone has a better drilling response to weight on bit.
      •  Bits with roller bearings can be run at a higher RPM than bits with journal bearings.
      •  Bits with sealed bearings can give longer life than bits with open bearings.
      •  Milled tooth bits with journal bearings can be run at higher weights than milled tooth bits with
            roller bearings.
      •  Fixed cutter bits can run at higher RPM than roller cone bits.
      •  Bits with high cone offset may wear more on gauge.
      •  Bits with high cone offset may cause more hole deviation.

      Applications where roller cone bits tend to be used in preference to fixed cutter bits include:




                                   Page 6 of 33                              Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 107 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      Exploration wells where there is insufficient information to determine whether or not the formations
       to be drilled are too hard to be drilled with PDC bits. Another factor which favors roller cone bits in
      exploratory wells is size of cuttings. Geologists sometimes prefer that PDC bits not be run because
      the cuttings generated by PDC bits in potentially producing formations tend to be much smaller than
      those made by roller cone bits.

     Short intervals where the longer life of a higher cost PDC cannot be leveraged into a lower cost
      per foot.

     High risk situations where there is a high probability of damaging the bit (such as drilling out
     cement equipment that contains metal parts).

    Low cost drilling areas where the value of the time saved by a faster drilling PDC bit is not
       sufficient to offset the higher bit price.

     Extremely hard formations where PDC bits have not yet been demonstrated to drill economically.

      Highly faulted areas with hard stringers where  it  is extremely  difficult to predict when an
      extremely hard streak (particularly one containing chert nodules) will be encountered.

2.3  The IADC Roller Cone Bit Classification System
      This classification scheme provides a method for categorizing roller cone bits according to their
      design features and intended applications. The classification code for an individual bit contains four
      characters. The first three characters are numeric and the fourth is alphabetic.

       First Character - Cutting Structure Series (1-8)
     The Series numbers describe general formation characteristics. Numbers 1-3 refer to milled tooth
        bits, and 4-8 cover insert bits. Within the groups, the formation becomes harder as the number
      increases.

     Second Character- Cutting Structure Types(1-4)
     Each of the above Series is divided into four Types, or degrees of hardness. Type 1 refers to bits
      designed for the softest formation in a particular Series and Type 4 to bits for the hardest.

      Third Character - Bearing/Gauge
     Seven categories exist for bearing design and gauge protection.

     Fourth Character- Features Available (Optional)
      Sixteen alphabetic characters are used to indicate "Features Available". These include special
       cutting structures, hydraulic configurations and body gauge protection.





                                   Page 7 of 33                              Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 108 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                                   Protected Gauge Bearing, Friction Sealed
     7


                                          Bearing Friction Sealed
     6


                                    Protected Gauge Bearing, Roller Sealed
     5                   GAUGE
    &
                                           Bearing Roller Sealed
     4


                                        Protected Gauge Bearing, Roller                              BEARINGS 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                             2000

                                      Cooled Air Bearing, Roller
     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           November
     1                            Bearings Roller StandardCOURSE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Rev.0,


          1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4                             Type

                                      high and                            firm           high and                       and           hard        orPRACTICES                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         strength                                                 quartzitic              chert                             and clays,                                 and sand,                                              shale,                                                                                                                                                                    compressive                                               sand                                                       including                                                                     strength                                                           including and                                           hole                                                                                                                                                                 silty                                                                                                                       chalk.                                                            high                                                                                                                                                                                                                                including                                top                                                                                                                                                                                    strengthDRILLING                                                                   strength     sharp                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            limestone,                                           33                                                           and                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       compressive                                                                                                                                                                                                                              shale,                  of                    TYPE                                                   8                                                     beds,             with                                                                                                                                                                                           formations salt                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  dolomite,                            formations                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         compressive                                red                                                                              high                        silty                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            siltstone,                                                                                                                                                                   formations                    Page                                                                                     low
                                                                                                                             with                                                                                                         compressive           occasional                                                  gypsum,                   compressive                                                                                                                                                     formations                      abrasive                                   with                                                     abrasive                                                                clays, with                                                                                                                                             shale,                                                                            limestone,                                             FORMATION                                                                         FORMATIONS    low                                    low                                                                                                                          dolomite,                                                            hard        and                                                 and                               abrasive                                                                                                                                          shales,           hard                                                             streaks          Bits                                    gumbo                                      with                                                with                   or                                                                                                                           and                                                                                                                     formations                                                                                                                                                              formations                  formations abrasive                                                                                                                       softer          Cone                                                                                          medium                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           streaks       hard                                                                                                                                                                                                                    including                                                                                                including                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   sandstone,                                                                                                                             hard hard material                              to                                                                            or                                                                                                                                                                           medium                                                                                      semi-abrasive                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    semi-abrasive shales,               Roller                                                             formations                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 formations          limestone
   -                                                  to                                      Soft drillabillity unconsolidated              Medium strength         Hard, sandy       Soft drillabillity shaley           Soft           Medium including quartzitic         Hard, abrasive material                Extremely granite             Codes
                   Series  1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8
          IADC               BITS TOOTH MILLED          BITS INSERT CARBIDE TUNGSTEN


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 109 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


3.0  Fixed Cutter Bits

      Unlike roller cone bits, no uniform classification system exists which relates bit style to formation
        drillability. There is an IADC classification but it does not relate to formation drillabillity.
3.1  Fixed Cutter Bit Types
      Although some modern bit styles incorporate more than one diamond type (e.g. natural diamond
     and TSP), the bits are traditionally classified according to the nature of their diamond cutter. The
      three types of fixed diamond cutters are: natural diamond, Thermally Stable Polycrystalline (TSP)
     diamond and Polycrystalline Diamond Compact (PDC).
3.1.1 PDC Bits
      Cutting structure made of manufactured diamonds which are thermally stable up to 700deg C. PDC
       bits cut the formation in a shearing action.

      Unlike the relatively small diamonds used in (natural) diamond and even TSP bits, the PDC can be
      attached to the body as large, sharp cutting elements. The PDC cutting elements are bonded to a
      tungsten  carbide  substrate  (providing  further  impact  resistance)  which  are  fixed  into  the
      body/blades of the bit. The body can be of the steel or matrix type.
    PDC bits currently represent a large majority within fixed cutter bits.
3.1.2 Natural Diamond Bits
      Cutting structure made of natural diamond (stable up to about 850deg C) which require good
      cooling and are sensitive to shock load.
      Cutting mechanism: Ploughing/Grinding.
      Body: Matrix only
3.1.3 TSP Bits
      Cutting  structure  is made  of  manufactured  diamonds,  which  exhibit  higher  resistance  to
      temperature (stable up to 1000-1200deg C) than natural diamonds which might contain inclusions.
     Advantage over natural diamond: TSP diamond can be orientated in the bit body and are self
      sharpening like PDC cutters when they start to wear.

      But TSP diamonds are more difficult to bond to support material than PDC, therefore, like natural
      diamond, they are used for matrix bodied type bits only.

      Cutting mechanism: Mainly Ploughing/Grinding  like natural diamonds and, to a lesser extent,
      shearing.
3.1.4 Impregnated Diamond Bits
      Impregnated Diamond bits (commonly called impregnated or 'impreg' bits) contain sharp natural
     diamond grit mixed (in various concentrations) through a tungsten carbide matrix.

     The diamonds used in these bits are generally much smaller than those used in conventional
      natural diamond bit. Larger sized natural diamonds are placed on the gauge to maintain the hole
      size during the bit run. TSP diamonds are sometimes used in conjunction with the diamond grit for
       specific applications where higher rates of penetration are required.

      Impregnated Diamond bits  drill in a similar fashion to natural diamond cutter bits but when the
     diamonds become worn and torn out of the matrix, new ones are continually being exposed. This
      gives them the ability to drill the hardest, most abrasive formations at high RPM, which makes them
       particularly useful when turbines are used.





                                   Page 9 of 33                              Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 110 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

3.2 PDC Bit Technology

3.2.1 Bit Nomenclature


            Steel Bodied Bits                                   Matrix Bodied Bits





                                           Courtesy of Reed-Hycalog

     Cone
     The cone of the bit provides a degree of stability when the bit is drilling.

     Nose
     The nose is the first part of the bit to encounter any change in formation when drilling a vertical
       hole. Because of this, it is desirable to have a relatively large number of cutters set on the nose.

     Taper
     The taper length is usually governed by the cutter density requirement and the application. A bit
      designed for harder formations would therefore tend to have a more extended taper than one
      designed for softer formations. However, an alternative way to achieve a high cutter density without
      increasing the taper is to increase the number of blades. PDC bits used in directional drilling
      applications will generally have a shorter taper.

     Outer Diameter Radius (ODR)
     The ODR refers to that region of the bit profile where the radius at the end of the flank leads into the
     gauge of the  bit. This region of a  bit  is extremely important, especially  in motor or turbine
      applications where rotating speeds are high, as the cutters must withstand the effects of high
       velocity due to their radial position on the face of the bit.
      Although the angular velocity of cutters at the bit gauge is identical to that of cutters within the cone,
      the tangential velocity is greater since it is a function of radial location.



                                   Page 10 of 33                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 111 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


     Gauge
      Length
      Generally  standard,  gauge  length   is  a  compromise  between   stability  and  directional
      responsiveness.
         •  Long gauge provides increased bit stability.
         •   Short gauge design  is used  for increased  directional responsiveness,  ultra  short  for
              sidetracking capability.

      Protection
      Maintaining the  full gauge diameter  is crucial to avoid undersized hole.  If the  bit  is used for
       directional applications, especially  if a motor or a turbine is to be used, reinforced protection is
      necessary.

      Natural diamonds are used for gauge protection on matrix bodied bit, but can also be used in
      tungsten carbide inserts in the gauge of steel bodied bits.

      Steel bodied bits use tungsten carbide inserts.

       In both cases, diamond impregnated elements may also be positioned to the rear of the gauge
       cutters and face cutters to back them up and to help reduce bit related torque by limiting the depth
       of cut of the primary cutters. Gauge cutters should be of a pre-flattened shaped.

3.2.2 PDC Bit Cutting Action
    PDC bits drill by cutting the formation in shear, much like the cutting action of a lathe. The vertical
      compressive loads cause the rock to  fail  in shear along a  failure plane approximately  4   to
       horizontal.





                                                                                 Courtesy of Reed-Hycalog





    A bit’s cutting action plays a key role in the amount of energy required to drill through a given
      formation. This characteristic is generally presented in terms of "specific energy" which is defined as
      the amount of energy required to cut a unit volume of formation. A bit which fails the rock in shear
       directly rather than using high compressive loads to cause the rock to fail in shear along its natural
       failure plane has a lower specific energy. As a general rule shear strength is approximately one-half
      the compressive strength. However, this relationship can vary depending on specific rock type.





                                   Page 11 of 33                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 112 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      Self-Sharpening Wear
     To keep the energy efficiency of a shear-type cutting mechanism high, it is essential that the cutting
     edge of the PDC remains sharp. As the cutter is used and a wear flat develops, the specific energy
       of the cutting system increases as more weight is required to maintain a constant depth of cut.
    PDC cutters retain a sharp edge as they wear because the tungsten carbide directly behind the
     diamond layer wears away more rapidly than the polycrystalline diamond, due to its lower abrasion
      resistance. This results in the formation of a diamond lip which remains sharp throughout the life of
      the cutter.





                                                             Diamond Lip                             Courtesy of Reed-Hycalog


       In contrast to this, diamonds on a natural diamond bit dull with use, taking on a smooth, polished
      appearance. The teeth on a roller cone product similarly wear and, in the process, become dull.
      This results in a cutting mechanism that becomes less efficient as the bit drills. Consequently, roller
     cone bits and diamond bits tend to drill at a lower rate of penetration as they wear, while PDC bits
      maintain a higher rate of penetration throughout the total interval drilled.

3.3 PDC Cutter Technology

3.3.1 The PDC Cutter
      Thermally stable up to 700 deg C, the manufactured PDC cutting element is bonded to a tungsten
      carbide substrate that is fixed into the body/blades of the bit.  In most cases, the PDC cutters are
      attached to either angled post or cylindrical substrates, although other types of assembly are
     produced by bit manufacturers. For instance, a cylindrical support means that greater cutter density
     can be achieved compared with standard post cutters, as conical cutters can be placed closer
      together in the bit body.





                                   Page 12 of 33                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 113 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE





        Post Assembly                     Cylinder-type Assembly             Conical Support



             Courtesy of Reed-Hycalog


3.3.2 Cutter Density
      Generally speaking, the harder and/or more abrasive the formation, the higher the cutter count.
     However, a higher cutter count also makes a bit more costly (particularly since PDC components
       constitute a high percentage of the total bit cost) and, in general, cause the bit to drill at a slower
       rate of penetration.

3.3.3 Cutter Size
    A variety of PDC cutter sizes are available ranging from 8mm to 50mm in diameter. Larger PDC
       cutters are more aggressive, generate more torque and are more susceptible to impact damage
      than bits with smaller cutters and so are better suited to soft formations.

      •    8mm cutters have been used on products for harder formations. However, smaller cutters
              often mean lower ROP and higher WOB. Also useful in directional applications as the
            reduced point loading resulting from the distribution of the WOB over a larger number of
              cutters produces less bit face torque.
      •    13mm cutters are the industry standard size, they are the most suitable for medium to hard
             formation as well as abrasive rock.
      •    16mm cutters are often associated with medium-soft to medium-hard formation.
      •    19mm cutters are generally associated with fast drilling in soft to medium formation. Large
             diameter cutters are proven to perform well in low compressive strength, highly elastic
              formations, which tend to deform rather than fracture.
      •    24mm and above are associated with soft formations. Space is limited on the bit face and
            by using large cutters, cutter redundancy is limited. When one cutter fails, the bit may have
               to be POOH. Additionally, as large cutters wear, they provide a large surface of contact
            which increases heat causing damage to the diamond layer.

     Recent developments in bit technology include combining two different of cutter sizes (e.g. 13mm
     and 16mm) as well as using different designs of cutter in the same bit.

3.3.4 Cutter Distribution
      Cutters are positioned across the bit face so as to ensure the most efficient use of the PDC
      elements, allowing maximum bit life. For harder or more abrasive formations, cutter redundancy is
      optimised.





                                   Page 13 of 33                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 114 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


3.3.5 Cutter Orientation
     The orientation of a PDC cutter in the bit body, and hence, the angle at which the cutter engages
      the formation, has a significant effect upon the performance of a PDC bit. The orientation of a PDC
       cutter is defined by its back rake and side rake angles, both of which can be positive, negative or
      zero.





     Back Rake
     The angle from vertical of the PDC cutting element as it is presented to the formation. This controls
      the aggressiveness and life of the cutter.

     The back rake angle is said to be more aggressive when the cutter is positioned such that a given
      weight on bit results in a greater depth of cut. The smaller the back rake angle, the more aggressive
      the cutter. Therefore, a cutter with a back rake angle of 5° will be more aggressive than a cutter with
     a back rake of 30°. In general, a more aggressive back rake will make the bit more suitable for
        drilling softer formations at high rates of penetration.  If the back rake is too aggressive, then drilling
      harder formations might result in chattering of the cutter and the possible initiation of bit whirl.

      Cutters with a larger back rake angle are less aggressive and therefore better suited to drilling
      harder formations. They also generate less torque for a given weight on bit allowing for improved
       steerability in directional applications.  In most cases, a PDC bit will be designed such that the
       cutters are arranged with varying degrees of back rake, radiating from the most aggressive in the
     cone of the bit, out to the least aggressive at the ODR.

     Side Rake
    A measure of cutter skew relative to a line at 90° to the direction of travel of the bit. Side rake can
     be used to mechanically direct cuttings either towards the cone of the bit (negative side rake) or
      outwards towards the junk slots (positive) to aid cleaning of the bit face. However, as increasing
      side rake results in the reduction of the effective operating width of the cutter, its use has somewhat
       limited application.

3.3.6 Cutter Design - General
      Since PDC drill bits first became available, bit manufacturers have focussed upon ways to make
       their products both more impact and abrasion resistant. The following features are amongst those
       readily available on PDC bit designs:



                                   Page 14 of 33                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 115 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


     Chamfered Edges
     Chamfered or beveled edges around the circumference of the diamond table improves impact
      resistance and, when taken to extremes, are said by some manufacturers to help reduce torque by
       effectively increasing the cutter back rake.

      Multiple Diamond Layers
     GeoDiamond's Twin EdgeTM cutters feature a second PDC disc positioned within the carbide
      support behind the primary cutting element.

     Diamond Impregnated Supports
     The Security DBS range of FI PDC bits have primary PDC cutting elements the supports of which
      are composed of a series of diamond impregnated disks.

3.3.7 Cutter Geometry
     The PDC diamond table attached to the cutter post is susceptible to a variety of modes of failure.
     These include impact damage in the form of chipped and broken teeth, and spalled diamond layers
     as a result of poor heat transfer through the cutter. Such cutter damage obviously has an impact
     upon bit performance.  In recent times, bit manufactures have been addressing this by focussing
     upon the internal geometry of the PDC cutting elements.

    On a standard PDC cutter, the bond between the diamond layer and the carbide substrate forms a
      simple, planar interface.

                               Diamond table

                                                          Planar interface

                                                   Carbide support


                                Standard PDC cutter

     By designing a cutter with a non-planar interface between these two elements, superior impact and
      abrasion resistance results. This is due to the improved mechanical locking and reduced stress
     between diamond table and carbide and substantially increased diamond volume. In recent years
     such innovations have allowed PDC bits to be run in formations which were previously thought
       suitable only for insert roller cone designs or natural diamond bits.

     Examples of non-planar cutter substrates





                                       Courtesy of Reed-Hycalog





                                   Page 15 of 33                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 116 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


     Most PDC bit manufacturers are now able to supply PDC cutters of this time. Examples include:
    GeoDiamond                     Security DBS                 Reed-Hycalog





  GEOGRID™ Cutter                ClawTM Cutter              ASTRATM Range Cutter


3.4  Fixed Cutter Bit Applications and Design Characteristics
    PDC  bits are highly suitable  for  soft  to medium hard, generally non-abrasive formations  of
     homogeneous composition. Improvements in cutter technology and bit design have, however, been
      extending the range of formations that can be drilled with PDC bits in recent years. Conglomerate,
      chert and volcanic rocks are usually not considered PDC drillable.

       In contrast, TSP and natural diamond bits perform well in medium to hard formation such as
      limestone, dolomite, anhydrite, mildly abrasive sands, interbedded hard sandstone and brittle silty
      shales.

    TSP and natural diamond bits are effective in harder (medium to hard), more abrasive formations
      than PDC bits but are not as effective in softer formations.

     Due to their cutting mechanism, shearing as opposed to the crushing/gouging action produced by
      conventional roller cone bits, PDC bits require considerably less WOB.

      Fixed cutter bits are known to perform better in oil based mud than in water based mud whereas
        roller cone bits are less affected.

    When the drilling parameters are optimised for a given formation, considerable ROP improvement
     can be expected when compared with conventional roller cone bits. However, these bits are a lot
     more expensive than conventional roller cone designs. For these reasons a thorough economic
      evaluation must be performed.

      Fixed cutter bits are also a good option for the following applications:

3.4.1 High Rotary Speeds
      Often associated with motor but particularly with turbine due to the inability of tri-cone bit bearing
      seals to tolerate very high rotary speeds. Fixed cutter bits also carry less risk of leaving junk in the
       hole. Fixed cutter bits designed specifically for turbine applications are built with an extended
        profile, generally parabolic with a long taper and a nose close to the central axis of the bit. This
      allows for increased cutter redundancy in high wear areas.





                                   Page 16 of 33                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 117 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE





                                     PDC turbine bit





                              Courtesy of Reed-Hycalog


3.4.2 Slimhole Drilling
      Fixed cutter bits drill more efficiently than roller cone bit at low weight on bit. For this reason, PDC
     and natural diamond bits are often favoured for coiled tubing drilling where transfer of weight to the
        bit face is limited.

3.4.3 Directional and Horizontal Drilling
    When reduced weight on bit is required for directional drilling purposes, PDC bits can again be
     more effective than roller cone designs. However, in certain formations, PDC bits may produce too
     much torque when steering is involved. In this case, tricone bits may be the preferred option.
    When selecting a PDC drill bit for a directional application, the following design features should be
      considered:
         •  Cutter Size
            Smaller diameter PDC cutters produce less reactive torque than, say, 19mm cutters and so
             aid steerability. In general, cutters of 13mm diameter and smaller are the preferred option.
          The use of torque reducing features are of particular importance when bits are to be run in
            conjunction with a mud motor which will stall if the bit produces too much
         •  Cutter Orientation
           High degrees of back rake on PDC cutters make bit designs less aggressive, therefore
            helping maintain tool face control.
         •  Bit Profile
         A flat face profile, incorporating a relatively shallow cone with a sharp break over from the
          nose to the shoulder of the bit, reduces point loading on individual cutters by allowing better
              distribution of WOB. This also reduces torque and makes the bit more steerable.
         •  Gauge Length
         Gauge length is very important when selecting bits for directional applications.  If a lot of
             steering is likely to be required then a short gauge length, 2.50 inch or less, will provide better
            responsiveness.  However,  if drilling long, horizontal sections a bit with a slightly longer,
             heavily protected gauge, may be preferred.
         •  Additional Design Features
          Upreaming (or backreaming) cutters: positioned at the lower end of the gauge pads, they
            provide extra, lateral cutting action.
          Chamfered lead edge on gauge pads.


                                   Page 17 of 33                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 118 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE




           Example  PDC   bit   for
              directional applications



                                                                     •   Flat faced profile
                                                                     •  8mm PDC cutters
                                                                     •   30-40° back rake on
                                                                      shoulder
                                                                     •   1.00" gauge length
                                                                     •   chamfered   gauge
                                                              pads
                                                                     •   upreaming cutters
               Courtesy of Reed-Hycalog


3.4.4 Bi-Centric and Eccentric Bit Designs
      Bi-centric/eccentric bits are designed such that their pass through diameter is smaller than
      the diameter of the hole that they actually drill. This is achieved by designing the bit so
      there is an asymmetry in the structure, such as an enlargement in the body to one side of
      the axis. In use, this enlarged side will rotate with the bit and cut a full gauge hole (or
       slightly over gauge depending on the design and degree of eccentricity). However, with no
      rotation, the asymmetry allows the bit to pass through a narrower diameter hole than the
     one just drilled. Some designs feature a smaller pilot bit section followed by a larger
      diameter, reaming section.





                                                                   14 ½" x 17 ½" DS101HF+V
                                                                      Reed-Hycalog BiCentrix® bit.
                                                                                               Pilot bit diameter:      9 7/8"
                                                                  Pass through diameter: 14 ½"
                                                                                           Drilled hole diameter:  17 ½"





                                 Courtesy of Reed-Hycalog

       Bi-centric and eccentric bits have a number of applications and can be of benefit when drilling
      sloughing shales or creeping salt formations.


                                   Page 18 of 33                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 119 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


3.5  Fixed Cutter Bit Classification
      Unlike roller cone bits, no uniform classification system exists that relates bit style to application.
      Fixed cutter IADC codes are intended only to provide a means for characterising the general
      physical appearance of fixed cutter drill bits. Fixed cutter bits with similar or even the same IADC
      code, may have significantly different performance capabilities.

     The IADC fixed cutter bit classification system is represented by a four figure coding system. The
       four  characters  describe body  material,  cutter  density,  cutter  size  or  type, and  bit  profile
       respectively.

     Body Material
      M – matrix  S  - steel

      Cutter Density
          For PDC bits, this character relates to total cutter count, including standard gauge cutters, and
          ranges from 1 (light set) to 4 (heavy set).
          For surface-set diamond bits (natural diamond, TSP or impregnated diamond designs), the
         numbers 6 to 8 are used to designate cutter density. In this case, however, the character
           represents the size of the diamonds used in the bit design rather than cutter count.
           •   6  diamond sizes larger than 3 stones per carat
           •   7 3 stones per carat to 7 stones per carat
           •   8  smaller than 7 stones per carat.
            In essence, the character is a rough indication of the how hard or abrasive the intended
           application would be. That is, a surface-set diamond bit with an 8 representing cutter density
          would have smaller diamonds and would be intended for harder and  /or more abrasive
           formations than would a diamond bit coded as a 6.

      Cutter Size or Type
          For PDC bits, this digit represents the size of the cutters as follows:
           •   1  cutters larger than 24mm diameter
           •   2 14mm to 24mm diameter
           •   3 8mm - 13mm diameter
           •   4 8mm cutters and smaller
          For surface-set bits, the third digit represents the type of diamond:
           •   1  natural diamonds
           •   2 TSP
           •   3  mixed diamond type i.e. natural diamonds and TSP elements
           •   4  impregnated diamond designs

      Bit Profile
     The last character in the coding system indicates the profile of the bit design based upon overall
      length of the cutting face of the bit. Ranges from 1 (flat profile) to 4 (long tapered turbine style).
     The only exception to this is for 'fishtail' type PDC drill bits, whose cleaning capabilities whilst drilling
       soft formations at high rates of penetration is considered to be a more important feature than its
        profile.

4.0  Bit Handling and Make-up Procedures

     Care should be exercised when handling tricone bits fitted with tungsten carbide inserts
     and fixed cutter bits of all types. Under no circumstances should the cutting structure of
      fixed cutter bit be allowed to contact any steel surfaces on the rig.




                                   Page 19 of 33                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 120 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      Prior to initial make-up, all bits should be gauged with an appropriately sized gauge ring
        i.e. calibrated “Go” and “No Go” gauge rings. Because roller cone bits and diamond bits
     are manufactured to different tolerances,  it is important that bits be graded using the
      appropriate gauge ring. A 'Go' gauge, designed for grading roller cone bits, will show an in
     gauge fixed cutter bit to be undergauge. A 'No Go' gauge should always be used to grade
     a fixed cutter bit.

    The bit serial number should be recorded, together with the bit type and diameter. The bit
     should be closely examined for damage, blocked nozzles, etc. If needed, TFA (Total Flow
     Area) can then be modified using the appropriate spanner to change the nozzles. In all
     cases, check that nozzles are properly fitted. Natural diamond bits, impregnated bits and
    TSP bits have a fixed TFA which can not be modified at the rig site.

     Tricone bits should be made up to the drill string using a correctly sized bit breaker. Fixed
      cutter bits should be “walked” by hand onto the bit sub until the tool joints shoulder. The
      correct make–up torque should then to be applied.

5.0  Bit Running Procedures

5.1  Roller Cone Bits

5.1.1 Running in
         •  Make the bit up to proper torque.
         •  Lower the bit slowly through ledges and dog legs
         •  Lower the bit slowly at liner tops
         •  Roller cone bits are not designed for reaming.  If reaming is required then  it should be
           undertaken with light weight and low RPM
         •  Protect nozzles from plugging

5.1.2 Establish a bottom hole pattern
         •  Rotate the bit and circulate when approaching bottom. This will prevent plugged nozzles and
             clear out hole fill.
         •  Lightly tag the bottom with low RPM.
         •  Gradually increase the RPM.
         •  Gradually increase weight on WOB.

5.1.3 Before re-running green bits
         •  Make sure the bit is in gauge.
         •  Check any bit for complete cutting structure.
         •  Check any sealed bearing bit for effective seals.
         •  Soak any sealed bearing bit in water or diesel to loosen formation packed in the reservoir cap
             equalisation ports.
         •  Regrease l4¾" diameter and larger open bearing bits.

5.2  Fixed Cutter Bits

5.2.1 Preparation
         •   Before running a diamond bit into the hole, have a junk basket run on the previous bit.
         •   After the previous bit is pulled, inspect it for junk damage and other wear, then gauge it.
         •     If the previous bit appears OK, the bit may be prepared to be run into the hole.

                                   Page 20 of 33                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 121 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

         •  Check O-ring and  install nozzles,  if appropriate, using the correct nozzle spanner as
             supplied by the bit manufacturer.
         •  Check for cutter damage.
         •  Check that the bit is within tolerance on diameter and that there is no foreign material inside
                        it.

5.2.2 Running the bit (rotary assembly)
         •   Handle the fixed cutter bit with care. DO NOT set the bit down without placing wood or a
             rubber pad beneath the diamond cutters.
         •  A correct bit breaker should be used and the bit should be made up to the correct torque as
            determined by the pin connection size.
         •  Care should be taken in running the bit through the rotary table and through any known tight
              spots. Hitting ledges or running through tight spots carelessly may damage the cutters or
            gauge.
         •  Reaming  is not recommended, however,  if necessary, pick up the string and run the
          maximum fluid possible. Rotate at about 60 RPM. Advance bit through tight spot with no
           more than 4000 pounds weight on bit (WOB) at any time.
         •  As hole bottom is approached, the last three joints should be washed down slowly at full flow
           and with 40 to 60 RPM to avoid plugging the bit with fill.
         •  Once the bottom is located, the bit should be lifted just off bottom (0 to 1 foot if possible) and
                   full volume circulated while slowly rotating for about 5 to 10 minutes.
         •   After circulating, ease back to bottom and establish the bottom hole pattern.
         •  When ready to start drilling, increase the rotary speed to about 100 RPM and start cutting a
          new bottom hole pattern with approx. 1000 to 4000 pounds WOB.
         •   Cut at least one foot in this manner before determining optimum bit weight and RPM for
                 drilling.
         •   Determine optimum ROP by conducting a drill-off test.

5.2.3 Running the bit (PDM & turbine)
         •   Start the pumps and increase to the desired flow rate when approaching bottom.
         •   After a short cleaning period, lower the bit to bottom and increase WOB slowly.
         •   After establishing a bottom hole pattern, additional weight may be slowly added.
         •  As weight is increased, pump pressure will increase, so the differential pressure and WOB
           must be kept within the recommended downhole motor specifications.
         •    Drill pipe should be slowly rotated to prevent differential sticking.
         •    All other operating practices are as per standard practices.

5.3  Drill-Off Tests
        Drill-off tests are performed in order to ascertain the optimum combination of weight on bit and
       rotary speed to maximize penetration rate. They should be done:
      •   At the start of a bit run
      •  On encountering a new formation
      •     If a reduction in ROP occurs

5.3.1 Drill-Off Test Procedure
       1.        Maintain a constant RPM. Select a WOB (near maximum allowable).
       2.       Record the time to drill off a weight increment, i.e. 5,000 lbs.
       3.       Re-apply the starting weight and record the length of pipe drilled during step 2.
       4.      From steps 2 and 3 the penetration rate may be found.
       5.       Repeat steps 2 and 3 at least four times. The last test should be at the same value as the
                       first. This repeat test will determine if the formation has changed or not.


                                   Page 21 of 33                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 122 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

       6.        Plot seconds to drill off versus bit weight.
       7.        Plot penetration rate versus bit weight.
       8.        Select the bit weight which produced the fastest ROP. Maintain this WOB constant and
               repeat the above but varying the RPM.
       9.        Plot ROP versus RPM and select the RPM which resulted in the fastest ROP. This is the
             optimum rotary speed.
      10.     These values  for WOB and RPM obtained  will result  in optimum progress  for the
                  particular formation and bit type.

5.4  Drilling Out Float and Shoe Equipment
          If using a PDC  bit, ensure that the float equipment  is PDC  drillable.   Drilling out should be
      performed with high WOB and low RPM.

6.0  Bit Related Drilling Dynamics

     Downhole vibrations can be extremely detrimental to  bit performance and may also result in
     damage of downhole tools such as MWD/LWD sensors and mud motors. Downhole vibrations are
      associated largely with the interaction between drill bits and the formation being drilled and are, in
      the main, the result of the nature of the somewhat aggressive cutting structure of PDC designs. It
      should be remembered however, that such vibrational problems are not restricted to PDC bit runs
     and that roller cone bit assemblies can be subject to many of the same problems.
     There are three main forms of downhole vibration, which, whether occurring independently of one
      another or together, can impede overall drilling performance:

      •   Axial vibrations
     •   Lateral vibrations
     •  Torsional vibrations

6.1  Axial Vibrations
      Often referred to as 'bit bounce', axial vibrations take the form of periodic vertical motion of the bit
       in the direction of the bit’s central axis. As a bit vibrates up and down at the bottom of the hole, the
      weight applied to each individual cutter changes. The resulting depth of cut for the cutters then
       varies, ranging from a minimum when the bit is in the up position to a maximum when the bit is
      again on bottom. Variations in the depth of cut translate into variations in torque. These torque
       fluctuations can be a cause of torsional vibration at the bit, leading to the potential for slip-stick
      behaviour. Bit bounce is generally of more concern when running roller cone bits.

6.2  Lateral Vibrations
       Lateral vibration, sometimes referred to as ‘bit whirl’, is the periodic sideways movement of the bit
       in the "x-y" plane. Bit whirl is a specific phenomenom that occurs when the downhole dynamic
      forces cause the bit's instantaneous center of rotation to move from its geometric center. When a
    PDC bit whirls, it cuts a characteristic multi-lobed bottom-hole pattern versus the concentric circles
     seen in the bottom-hole pattern of a smooth running bit.





                                   Page 22 of 33                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 123 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE





        Bottom hole pattern produced by            Bottom  hole  pattern produced
        standard  PDC   bit   exhibiting                anti-whirl bit design
          whirling behaviour

                                           Courtesy of Reed-Hycalog


When an individual PDC cutter "grabs" the formation, the bit's instantaneous center of rotation is
shifted to the point of cutter/formation contact. This in turn creates a backward whirling motion that
imparts impact loading on the PDC cutters on the side opposite the center of rotation. Whirl induced
damage is generally caused by these high impact loads coming from behind the cutters.

Whirling occurs when an imbalance force is introduced, such as when:
•    Drilling an inclined hole
•   Formation hardness changes and the borehole is not perpendicular to the formation bedding
    planes
•  The drillstring is vibrating due to inadequate stabilisation
•  The sum of the forces on the individual cutters has a lateral component

The first three of these conditions are the result of factors beyond the control of the bit designer.
However, in an effort to overcome the latter, a great deal of emphasis is placed upon the force and
mass balancing of PDC bit designs.

Using the latest in CAD techniques, the bit designer can control the direction and relative magnitude
of the forces on individual PDC cutters. These individual cutter forces can be summed and resolved
into their resultant components producing a resultant axial force (weight-on-bit force), torsional force
(torque) and radial force for a known set of initial conditions. The radial, or ‘out of balance’, force is
virtually directly proportional to the axial force and is therefore usually expressed as a percentage of
the applied WOB in a particular direction.

Cutter force balancing is often confused with the dynamic mass balancing of the bit design as a
whole. As a bit is rotated, a force is generated which is influenced by the mass distribution of the bit.
This force is proportional to the mass of the bit, the distance between the center of mass and the
axis of bit rotation and the square of the speed of rotation. As most PDC bit designs are generally
symmetrical in shape, there will not usually be any great distance between the center of mass and
the designed axis of rotation. The effect of imbalance as a result of bit mass distribution is therefore
relatively insignificant when compared with the force generated by the cutting structure.

One of the ways in which bit manufacturers attempt to overcome the problem of out of balance
forces is to arrange for the sum of the load forces generated by the cutters to have a certain value
directed through a large, low friction gauge pad designed to slide along the borehole wall.  If the
value of this resultant cutter force is always higher than the unavoidable lateral forces, then the total
force will always pass through the gauge pad and bit will be self-stabilising while drilling. The


                             Page 23 of 33                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 124 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

direction of this force is limited to a small arc on the bit’s circumference and continually pushes
this area of the bit against the formation, The continuous contact against the formation reduces
downhole vibrations and prevents the bit ‘walking’ around the hole, i.e. bit whirl.



                                         Schematic of anti-whirl bit design

                                             Resultant  force  pushes   bit  against
                                           borehole ball through low friction gauge
                                      pad





Other manufacturers attempt to limit the effect of lateral vibrations by arranging PDC cutters such
that cutters on one blade directly track those on the preceding blade (as opposed to being
conventionally arranged in a spiral configuration, radiating from the cone of the bit). This approach
is taken by Security DBS in its Trac-Set range of PDC bits.The resulting grooves of formation which
remain uncut on each rotation of the bit are said to restrict lateral movement. Diamond impregnated
back-up studs, positioned directly behind the PDC cutters on each blade and familiar on many bit
designs, are also said to help reduce lateral vibrations.

Although the approach of each bit manufacturer towards the problem of bit whirl may vary, all aim to
ultimately improve the  stabilisation  of  the  bit design. One  bit manufacturer, Reed-Hycalog,
introduced a range of PDC bits the steerability of which is said to approach that of roller cone bit
designs. This is achieved by designing the bit with a 360° full contact gauge ring that prevents the
outer most cutters from biting into the formation. The resulting restriction in lateral movement helps
to stabilise the bit, produces a smoother torque response and reduces bit whirl.

As well as improving directional responsiveness, use of the  bit helps to produce a smoother
borehole.





      Bottom   hole    profile    of               Bottom hole profile resulting
       conventional  PDC   bit   in                from use of PDC bit with 360°
       experiments  conducted  by                         full contact gauge ring.
      Reed-Hycalog.


                               All pictures this page courtesy of Reed-Hycalog
                             Page 24 of 33                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 125 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE





                    12 ¼"  'Steering WheelTM' bit design by Reed-Hycalog. Note the full
                        contact gauge ring.

                                           All pictures this page courtesy of Reed-Hycalog


6.3  Torsional Vibrations and Slip-Stick
      Put simply, torsional stress is caused when one end of an object is twisted while the other end is
      held fixed or twisted in the opposite direction. Fluctuations in downhole torque can lead to the
     development of torsional vibrations.

     There are two basic classes of torsional vibration to which the drill string is subject:
      •   Transient vibrations which correspond to changes in downhole conditions, e.g. interbedded
           lithology types;
      •   Stationary vibrations which are self-induced through actions upon the  drill string such as
            frictional forces between the pipe and the borehole wall, changes in weight on bit or stabilisers
         hanging up

        Drill string torsional vibrations occur frequently. When they become severe, they can escalate into
       slip-stick oscillations whereby the bit may briefly stop turning until sufficient torque is developed at
      the bit to overcome static friction. When the stalled bit breaks free, it does so at rotational speeds
      from two to ten times the surface rotational speed. At the point of breaking free, a torsional wave
      then travels from the drill bit up the drill string to the surface. The rig reflects this wave back down to
      the bit, which again stalls. This cycle will be repeated unless the drilling parameters are adjusted to
       interrupt it. During severe torsional vibrations,  it is possible for the bit to spin backwards. In hard,
     competent rock formations this can damage the bit in a very short time.

        Drill string torsional vibrations can be identified by cyclic oscillations of the surface torque, the drive
      motor current and sometimes the rotary speed. Cyclic variations in standpipe pressure might also
     be observed.

       Slip-stick causes torque and rotational speed oscillations along the entire length of the drill string.
     These oscillation periods, and cyclic torque behavior measured at the surface, are good indicators
       of torsional vibrations in the drill string. The characteristics of the oscillations depend on the length
     and weight of the drill pipe, the mechanical properties of the drilling system, the surface rotational
      speed, and the nature and location of the downhole friction.

     By using the maximum, the minimum and the average values of the surface torque, one may
     deduce the extent of the slip-stick motion of the bit.

                                   Page 25 of 33                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 126 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


     Reducing weight on bit and/or increasing rotary speed can help remedy the problem. In severe
      cases, modification of the lubricating properties of the mud system may be required. The use a drill
        bit with

        Drill string torsional vibrations, and in particular slip-stick oscillations, are detrimental to the life of
      the drill string and the bit. Cyclic torque oscillations can lead to premature fatigue failure of drill pipe.
     There are tremendous advantages to be realized by reducing or eliminating slip-stick oscillations.
     The “stick” phase of slip-stick increases the probability of having a stuck pipe or a twist off, while the
        “slip” phase is damaging to the bit due to the high rotational speeds that can be attained by the bit
     and could lead to backing off of connections.

6.3.1 Prediction and Monitoring of Downhole Vibrations
      Software packages are now available which, when used appropriately, can help to predict the
       likelihood of the occurrence of downhole vibrations.  Part of the directional driller's BHA design
      software, Sperry-Sun's 'WhirlTM' module can predict, for a given BHA and hole geometry, the
      combinations of weight on bit and rotary speed that are likely to excite the BHA at resonant
      frequencies and thus induce bit whirl. This provides the opportunity at the BHA design stage to
       either change the design to be more tolerant or to issue the driller with a set of parameters that he
      should avoid.

    A number of service companies have developed downhole tools which enable vibration levels to be
     measured in real-time. An example of such a tool is Sperry-Sun's MWD Drill String Dynamics
      Sensor. The tool consists of a triaxial accelerometer package mounted in a modified Dual Gamma
     Ray  tool  thus  eliminating  the  necessity  for an  additional MWD sub  in  the  string.   The
      accelerometers are oriented with the Z axis along the drill string, the X axis aligned laterally and the
    Y axis at 90° to the other two axes but tangential to the drill string. This configuration allows the tool
       to monitor axial, lateral and torsional vibrations as they occur. Real-time displays of average, peak
     and instantaneous acceleration data can be used to interpret and analyse downhole vibrations, thus
       indicating the onset of slip-stick behaviour, bit whirl and bit bounce and affording the opportunity to
      take corrective action.

7.0  Drilling Problem Identification

     The three major sources of information while drilling are pressures (differential and circulating),
      torque and penetration rate:

7.1  Differential Pressure
     Reduced differential pressure indicates one or more of the following:
      •  Reduced flow rate
      •  Wash out in the pipe
      •   Extreme erosion of the bit (not usual)
      •  Reduced WOB

     An increase in differential pressure indicates one or more of the following:
      •   Increased flow rate
      •   Cutters have worn so that the bit face is in contact with the bottom of the hole.
      •   Excessive WOB
      •   Large depth of cut: formation softer than expected

7.2  Circulating Pressure
      (Standpipe pressure with bit off bottom)
      Increased circulating pressure could be due to one or more of the following:

                                   Page 26 of 33                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 127 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      •   Heavier mud weight or inadequate mud properties
      •   Plugged or partially plugged bit nozzles
      •   Increased flow rate
      •   Annular restriction

     Decreased circulating pressure could be due to one or more of the following:
      •   Lighter mud weight
      •  Wash out
      •  Reduced flow rate
      •   Air in the mud
      •  Pump malfunction

7.3  Torque
      Increasing torque:
      •   Hole angle changing
      •  Wash out
      •   Formation change
      •   Poor mud properties
      •  WOB increased
      •   Poor hole cleaning
      •   Bearing failure on tri-cone bit

      Decreasing torque:
      •   Formation change
      •   Rotary speed change
      •  WOB decreased
      •   Improvement in mud properties
      •   Hole angle straightening out

       Irregular/Varying torque:
      •  Reaming with stabiliser
      •   Dry drilling
      •   Bit balled-up
      •    Drilling Sand formation
      •   Junk in hole
      •  Wash out
      •   Excessive WOB
      •   Rotary speed change

7.4  Penetration Rate (ROP)
     An increase in ROP may indicate:
      •   Formation change and/or
      •    Drilling close to balance (overbalance reducing)

    A decrease in ROP may result from one or more of the following::
      •  Worn bit
      •  WOB, RPM or hydraulics not optimised
      •   Formation change
      •  Crooked hole
      •  Wash out
      •   Overbalance increasing



                                   Page 27 of 33                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 128 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      Varying ROP indicates one or more of the following:
      •   Formation layers
      •   Bit wearing out
      •   Bit balled-up
      •  Wash out
      •   Inconsistent transference of WOB

8.0  Dull Bit Grading

     An important aspect of performance improvement is the reporting of all information pertaining to the
        bit run. Both the drilling engineer and the bit manufacturer alike will use this information to
      •   improve bit selection on future wells
      •   improve bit design.

      Along with the final dull grade of the bit itself, the following factors should all be accurately recorded:
      •   Footage drilled
      •   Penetration rate
      •   Average, maximum and minimum drilling parameters (WOB, RPM, flow rate)
      •    Drilling fluid properties (type, density, viscosity etc)
      •   Drive type (rotary, rotary steerable system, motor etc)
      •   Percentage steering for run
      •   Inclination, azimuth and build / turn rate
      •   Formation type
      •   Formation tops

8.1  IADC Dull Grading System
     The IADC dull bit grading chart allows for eight factors to be recorded. The chart applies to both
        roller cone and fixed cutter bit types, although different wear codes exist for each.

            CUTTING STRUCTURE               B       G          REMARKS
  INNER    OUTER      DULL     LOCATION    BRNG/    GAUGE    OTHER    REASON
  ROWS    ROWS      CHAR.                SEALS        1/16"      CHAR.     PULLED


8.1.1 Cutter / Cutting Structure Wear
      For both roller cone and fixed cutter bits, wear is measured on a scale from 0 (zero wear) to 8 (total
      loss of cutting structure).

    When grading a PDC bit,  it is important to remember that the cutters should be graded on the
      condition of the visible diamond table, regardless of cutter shape or exposure. For example, if at the
       start of the bit run a PDC cutter has 50% of it's diamond table exposed above blade height and
      then, after the run, all of the exposed 'usable' diamond has been worn, the correct wear grade for
       that cutter should be '4' - equating to 50% worn. A common mistake would be to grade such a cutter
     as an '8'.





                                                       Worn PDC cutter
             PDC cutter
              50%  exposure  above                                                        IADC dull grade: 4
                   blade height
                                   Page 28 of 33                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 129 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


      For Natural Diamond, TSP and Impregnated Diamond bits, wear is determined by comparing the
         initial visible cutter height (or, in the case of Impregnated designs, initial blade height) with the
     amount remaining after the bit run. It is therefore important to remember to inspect and measure the
       cutting structure before the bit is run.


                                          The amount of cutter wear is entered in two boxes on
                                                    the IADC  chart,  with  the  figures  representing  the
                                              average amount of wear of the cutters in the inner and
                                                     outer rows.


                                          WEAR

                                           0 - NO WEAR
                                                                        -
                                                                        -
                                           8 - NO USABLE CUTTING STRUCTURE



        Courtesy of Reed-Hycalog


8.1.2 Roller Cone Bit Location Codes
    When entering the location of dull characteristics for roller cone bits, the following codes, along with
      the number of the cone (i.e. 1 - 3), should be used:
    N = Nose row
   M = Middle row
    G = Gauge row
    A = All rows

8.1.3 Fixed Cutter Bit Location Codes





                                                                     Courtesy of Reed-Hycalog





                                    LOCATION
                                C - Cone
                                N - Nose
                                      T - Taper
                                   S - Shoulder
                              G - Gauge


                                   Page 29 of 33                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 130 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

8.1.4 IADC Dull Grading Codes





                                   Page 30 of 33                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 131 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


8.1.5 The Gauge
     Because roller cone bits and diamond bits are manufactured to different tolerances, it is important
       that bits be graded using the appropriate gauge ring. A 'Go' gauge, designed for grading roller cone
        bits, will show an in gauge fixed cutter bit to be undergauge. A 'No Go' gauge should always be
     used to grade a fixed cutter bit.

8.2  Used Bit Conditions / Causes / Remedies Tables

8.2.1 Roller Cone Bits

 Condition of Dull Bit           Possible Causes                   Possible Remedies
Excessive bearing wear  Excessive rotary speed              Slower rotary speed
                       Excessive rotating time             Reduced rotating hours
                       Excessive WOB                        Lighter WOB
                       Excessive sand in circulating system  Removal of sand from circulating fluid
                          Unstabilised drill collars                 Stabilise drill collars
                       Improper bit type                 Use  harder  formation   bit  type  with
                                                                stronger bearing structure
Excessive broken teeth   Improper bit type                 Use harder formation  bit type having
                                                   more teeth
                       Improper  break-in procedure used  Proper break-in procedure used for new
                              for new bit                                     bit
                       Excessive WOB for type used          Lighter WOB
Unbalanced tooth wear   Improper bit type                 Use of different bit type based upon the
                                                       rows  of  teeth which  are  excessively
                                                      worn on the dull bit
                       Improper  break-in procedure used  Proper break-in procedure used for new
                              for new bit                                     bit
Excessive tooth wear    Excessive rotary speed              Slower rotary speed
                       Improper bit type                 Use of harder formation bit type having
                                                     a greater number of teeth
                    Use of non hardfaced type          Use of bit type having hardfaced teeth
Fluid cut teeth & cone    Excessive circulation rate of fluid      Reduction in circulation fluid rate
                                                    Removal of sand from circulation fluid
                       Excessive sand in circulating system
Excessively             Improper bit type                 Use   of   bit  having  greater  gauge
undergauge                                                       protection
                       Excessive rotating time             Reduce rotating hours
Skidded due to balling    Excessive WOB                        Lighter WOB
                       Improper bit type                 Use of softer formation bit type having
                                                                  teeth more widely spaced
                             Insufficient fluid circulation rate        Increase fluid circulation rate





                                   Page 31 of 33                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 132 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


8.2.2 Fixed Cutter Bits

      Condition of Dull Bit          Possible Cause              Possible Remedies
      Polished diamonds       Rotating  in a  hard  formation  Add WOB or select a  bit with
                                without making hole              smaller diamonds/cutters
      Shattered diamonds      Improper stabilisation            Correct the stabilisation
                           Abnormal vibrations           Reduce   the    vibration   by
                                                           changing the RPM
                             Improper handling               Proper handling
     Sheared diamonds       Improper break-in,              Clean bottom of hole,
                            Broken nose stones              Correct break-in procedure
     Burned       (flattened)  Inadequate cooling              Increase the circulation rate to
     diamonds                                             improve cooling
     Burned bit               Overheating  as  a  result  of  Take care of proper hydraulics
                               plugging and/or balling up
     Heat checking of PDC  Overheating
      supports  or   bit  body
       (matrix)
     Worn throat            Fragments  of  hard  formation  Proper hydraulics
                                      rolling in the throat
     Loss of gauge          Long   intervals  reamed  with  When reaming minimise RPM
                                     insufficient   cooling  due   to  and bit weight
                             clogged junk slots
     Junk damage           Junk in hole just ahead of the  Clean bottom on previous  bit
                                             first diamond bit used            run with a junk basket  in the
                                                                         string

9.0  Bit Run Economics

      Although drill bits contribute only a fraction of the overall equipment cost, they can be the most
        critical element in the calculation of drilling economics. The cost of a PDC or diamond bit may be
     many times that of a milled tooth roller cone bit and it becomes evident that use of the more costly
        bit design must be economically justified through superior performance.

     The accepted method of assessing bit performance in terms of economics is to calculate the cost
      per foot drilled. As a PDC  bit  is considerably more expensive than roller cone products,  it is
      apparent the PDC bit must make up this additional cost by drilling faster and  / or further. The
       following formula is used to calculate the cost per foot drilled:

                         C = R (T + D) + B
                                      F

                    Where:
                    C = drilling cost per foot ($/ft)
                    R = rig operating cost ($/hr)
                        T = trip time (hr)
                    D = time spent drilling (hr)
                      B = bit cost ($)
                        F = footage drilled (ft)

     The drilling cost per foot formula is valid for any bit type. The formula can be used after a bit run
      with actual performance data to calculate an actual cost per foot or it can be used before a bit run
      with assumed values to compute a projected cost per foot. Projected cost per foot for a proposed bit
        is usually compared to the actual costs per foot achieved on offset wells.


                                   Page 32 of 33                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 133 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

When proposing a PDC bit in an area where roller cone bits are usually run,  it can be useful to
perform a break-even analysis to identify the performance level (in terms of footage and hours) a
PDC bit would have to achieve to have a total drilling cost equal to roller cone bits.
Following is an example of break-even analysis for a PDC bit:

 Performance data from an offset well

  Total rotating time     =     100 hrs
  Total trip time        =     45 hrs
  Rig operating cost     =     $500 hr
  Total bit cost         =      $16,000
  Total footage drilled   =      3,750 ft

Using the drilling cost equation, the cost per foot achieved in this section of the offset well is
calculated to be $23.60/ft.  If a PDC bit can result in the same value,  it will break even.  If better
performance can reasonably be expected, the use of a PDC can be justified economically. Break-
even analysis requires the performance of the PDC bit be estimated. This performance can be
calculated in two different ways.

1. Footage Assumed
If the footage is assumed to be equivalent, in this case 3,750, we must calculate the rate of
penetration of the bit necessary to achieve a cost-per- foot of $23.60/ft or less.
The following formula is used:

                         ROPBE =      R              .
                           C - (R x T + B) / F

               Where:
                         ROPBE = break-even penetration
                     C     = offset cost-per-foot ($/ft)
                         T     = trip time for PDC bit ($)
                       B     = cost of proposed bit ($)
                         F     = assumed footage (ft)
                     R     = rig operating cost ($/hr)

Using the offset well performance data previously presented, and the following assumptions for the
proposed bit, a break-even rate of penetration can be computed:
     T= 10 hr
     B= $28,000
     F= 3,750 ft

In this example, the proposed bit would be required to drill the interval with a penetration rate of at
least 34 ft/hr to justify its use.

2. Penetration Rate Assumed
If a penetration rate is assumed, we can calculate the minimum footage the bit must drill to save the
operator money. The derived formula in this case is:

                              FBE =  R x T + B   .
                          C  - R / ROP

                       where:
                               FBE = break-even footage (ft)
                     ROP = assumed penetration rate (ft/hr)

Assuming a penetration rate of 45 ft/hr, the proposed bit must drill 2,287 ft to break even against the
offset well.

                             Page 33 of 33                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 134 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

                    SECTION 7

           HYDRAULICS & HOLE CLEANING


     Contents
1.0    Introduction                                                                    2
2.0    Considerations For Hydraulics Planning                                              2
  2.1  Maximising ROP                                                                2
  2.2  Hole Cleaning                                                                   2
  2.3  Annulus Friction Pressure                                                         2
  2.4  Erosion                                                                        2
  2.5  Lost Circulation                                                                 2
3.0    Factors That Affect Hydraulics                                                      2
  3.1  Rig Equipment                                                                  2
  3.2  Drill String and Downhole Tools                                                     2
  3.3  Wellbore Geometry                                                              3
  3.4 Mud Type and Properties                                                          3
4.0    General Rules of Thumb                                                          3
  4.1  Flowrate                                                                       3
  4.2  Hydraulic Horsepower                                                            3
  4.3  Bit Pressure Drop                                                                3
  4.4  Jet Velocity                                                                     4
5.0    Hydraulic Calculations                                                            4
  5.1  Selecting Pump Pressure and Flow Rate                                             4
  5.2  Estimating Reynolds Number & Determining Flow Regime                                5
  5.3 System Pressure Losses                                                          9
  5.4  Optimising Bit Hydraulics                                                         11
6.0    Annular Hydraulics and Hole Cleaning                                              13
  6.1  General Factors Affecting Hole Cleaning                                             13
  6.2  Cuttings Slip Velocity                                                            13
  6.3  Cuttings Transport Velocity                                                       15
  6.4  Cuttings Transport Efficiency                                                      15
  6.5  Cuttings Concentration                                                           15
  6.6  Equivalent Circulating Density (ECD)                                               16
  6.7  Equivalent Circulating Density (ECD) with Cuttings                                     17
7.0    Hole Cleaning Guidelines                                                         17
  7.1  Guidelines for Vertical Holes                                                      17
  7.2  Guidelines for Deviated and Extended-Reach Wells                                    18
  7.3  Poor Hole Cleaning Indicators                                                     20
  7.4  Effects of Mud Type on Hole Cleaning Efficiency                                      20
  7.5  Hole Cleaning 'Aids'                                                             20
APPENDIX 1                                                                        22
  TFA Chart                                                                         22
APPENDIX 2                                                                        23
  Rheological Models                                                                 23





                                   Page 1 of 25                              Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 135 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

1.0  Introduction

      Hydraulics planning is part of the overall drilling optimisation process.
          It involves a calculated balance of the various components of the circulating system to maximise
    ROP and keep the bit and hole clean whilst remaining within any constraints of the wellbore,
      surface and downhole equipment.

2.0  Considerations For Hydraulics Planning

2.1  Maximising ROP
      Cuttings removal from the bottom of the hole is related to the fluid energy dissipated at the bit (bit
      hydraulic power).  It has been shown that bit hydraulic horsepower is optimised when the pressure
       differential (pressure drop) across the bit is equal to two thirds of the total system pressure (pump
      pressure). Maximising hydraulic horsepower can be used to increase penetration rate in medium to
      hard formations.

2.2  Hole Cleaning
       In soft formations or deviated holes hole cleaning is often the dominant factor. There is little point in
      maximising the ROP by selecting nozzles that optimising bit hydraulic horsepower or impact force if
      the resulting flow rate is insufficient to  lift the cuttings out of the hole. In these instances  it is
      preferable to determine a suitable flowrate first and then optimise the hydraulics.

2.3  Annulus Friction Pressure
       In slimhole or deep wells the annulus friction pressure need to be considered. Too high an annulus
        friction pressure increases the Equivalent Circulating Density (ECD) and can lead to lost circulation,
       differential sticking or hole instability.

2.4  Erosion
       Soft, unconsolidated formations are prone to erosion if the annulus velocity and therefore flow rate
      are too high or the annulus clearance is small leading to the possibility of turbulent flow. In these
      instances a reduction in flow rate will be required to minimise erosion.

2.5  Lost Circulation
          If heavy lost circulation is anticipated and large quantities of LCM could be pumped  it may be
      necessary to install larger bit nozzles to minimise the risk of bit plugging.

3.0  Factors That Affect Hydraulics

     The rig equipment, drill string and downhole tools, wellbore geometry, mud type and properties are
         all factors that can affect hydraulics.
3.1  Rig Equipment
     The single biggest factor of the rig equipment is the pump pressure limitation and volume output of
      the mud pumps in use. Increasing pump liner sizes increases the volume output but decreases the
     maximum allowable pump pressure. Most high pressure pipework from the mud pumps to the kelly
          / top drive is rated at a pressure higher than the pump rating.

3.2  Drill String and Downhole Tools
     The main effect of the drill string is the frictional pressure drop or parasitic pressure losses that
      occur within the drillpipe and drill collars.


                                   Page 2 of 25                              Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 136 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      For a given flowrate and depth, a drill string with a smaller ID will have higher parasitic pressure
      losses. Hence one of the benefits of using 5½” DP instead of 5” DP is that for the same flowrate
      there is more pressure available at the bit to optimise nozzle sizes or for the same parasitic
      pressure loss in the drill string there is more available flowrate.
     The addition of downhole tools can have an affect on the available or allowable pressure drop
      across the bit.
      Negative pulse MWD tools require about 800psi pressure drop below the MWD tool for adequate
      transmission of real time data.
     Most adjustable stabilisers require 450 to 800 psi off-bottom pressure drop below the tool for
      operation or actuation.
      Steerable motors with PDC bits have a total pressure drop of 1200 – 1500 psi. This pressure drop
        is made as follows:
      •      Off bottom differential pressure 200 psi
      •       Drilling pressure drop 600 – 800 psi for high torque low speed motors
      •       Drilling pressure drop of 1000 – 1200 psi for high speed motors
      •       Stalling buffer 400 – 500 psi
      Steerable motors with tricone bits have a total pressure drop of 400 – 600 psi due to the lower
      reactive torque of a tricone bit. This pressure drop is made up as follows:
      •      Off bottom differential pressure 200 psi
      •       Drilling pressure drop 200 – 400 psi for high torque low speed motors
      •    No stalling buffer, due to the lower reactive torque


3.3  Wellbore Geometry
     The deeper the hole the higher the parasitic pressure loss within the drillstring, the less available
      pressure there is at the bit to optimise nozzle sizes.
     The bigger the hole diameter, the lower the annulus velocity for a given flowrate, the harder it is to
       effectively remove the cuttings from the hole.
      Conversely the smaller the hole diameter, the higher the annulus friction pressure, the bigger the
       effect on ECD.
3.4 Mud Type and Properties
    Mud density and rheology directly affect the pressure losses with the circulating system. Mud
      rheology and the different available models will be discussed later.

4.0  General Rules of Thumb

4.1  Flowrate
      •       Flowrate should be maintained at 30 to 60 GPM per inch of bit diameter
      •      Flow rate must not be reduced to achieve more horsepower
      •     Too low a flow rate will cause bit balling and reduce effective hole cleaning

4.2  Hydraulic Horsepower
      Maintain 2.5 to 5 hydraulic horsepower per square inch of bit diameter.
     Maximum hydraulic horsepower should be considered when there is sufficient available pump
     horsepower

4.3  Bit Pressure Drop
     Design hydraulics for 50 – 65% pressure drop across the bit.
          If parasitic pressure losses are greater than 50% of the available pump pressure then optimise for
        jet velocity.



                                   Page 3 of 25                              Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 137 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

4.4  Jet Velocity
      Jet velocity affects chip hold down and penetration rate
     Keep jet velocity > 250 ft/sec

5.0  Hydraulic Calculations

       In order to optimise bit hydraulics and therefore bit performance, the entire hydraulic system must
     be considered.
     The following factors will be discussed:
      •   Circulating pressure
      •   Flow rate
      •  Optimum annular velocity
      •   Pressure losses in the system
      •   Pressure drop across the bit
      •   Hydraulic horsepower at bit
      •   Jet velocity and jet impact force

5.1  Selecting Pump Pressure and Flow Rate
    A flow rate and resultant circulating pressure sufficient to allow good hole cleaning and adequate
     power at the  bit but which do not exceed the maximum allowable surface pressure must be
      selected. The optimum flow rate will depend upon total system pressure losses and whether bit
      hydraulics are to be optimised on the hydraulic horsepower or the jet impact force model. Once the
     optimum flow rate has been selected, the following factors must be considered:
         -   are the pumps able to pump the desired flow rate?
         -    is the desired flow rate within the operating range of any down hole tools in the string?
         -   does the optimum flow rate exceed the desired minimum annular velocity?
         -   does the optimum flow rate exceed the desired maximum annular velocity?

5.1.1 Annular Velocity
    When designing the hydraulic programme, the annular velocity must be considered. It is important
       to avoid solids retention in the annulus as the subsequent increase in mud density and hydrostatic
     head could cause mud losses to the formation. An optimum value for annular velocity is selected
     between upper and lower limits.

      Velocity of fluid in the annulus is at it's lowest in places where the annular cross-sectional area is at
          it's highest. Since the area around the drill pipe typically has the largest cross-sectional area in the
       hole, the annular velocity is at it's lowest around the drill pipe. Conversely, the annular velocity will
     be at  it’s highest around the  drill collars. The annular velocity around the  drill pipe should be
      calculated to determine whether or not is high enough to effectively clean the hole. However, in
       certain soft formations prone to erosion, the annular velocity around the drill collars should also be
       calculated. If it is found to be too high the circulation rate should be reduced or smaller drill collars
      used. For a given drill pipe and hole size the annular velocity can only be changed by varying the
      flow rate.

     The fluid velocity in the annulus around the drill string is usually given by:

           24.51 × Q
    Va =    2           2
         ID HOLE - OD DP

     Where:         Va    = annular velocity, ft/min
              Q     = flow rate, gpm
                       IDHOLE = hole diameter or ID of casing, inches
                  ODDP  = outside diameter of either the pipe or collars, inches

                                   Page 4 of 25                              Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 138 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


5.1.2 Minimum Annular Velocity
     The minimum annular velocity is determined by the cuttings carrying capacity of the drilling fluid. If
      the well is not efficiently cleaned there will a build up of cuttings in the annulus resulting in an
      increase in mud density. The consequent increase in hydrostatic pressure could cause fluid losses
       to the formation. In deviated holes, cuttings beds may develop resulting in an increased risk of stuck
       pipe. The annular velocity should therefore, in relation to cuttings generation, be sufficient to
      maintain a fluid density below the fracture pressure of the formation.

      Another factor governing the lower limit of annular velocity is the rate of settling of the drilled
       cuttings in the annulus.  If this slip velocity exceeds the annular velocity then cuttings beds will
      develop and the density of the drilling fluid will increase. The cuttings carrying capacity of a mud
     system is highly influenced by its viscosity and gel strength.

5.1.3 Maximum Annular Velocity
          It is also important to avoid eroding loose formations and soft shales, which may result in large
      washouts, hole problems, stuck pipe and poor cement jobs. Therefore, the maximum annular
       velocity is limited by hole constraints and, in particularly sensitive formations, is often limited to 100
       ft/min. However, the rate of erosion of soft formations is influenced more by the flow regime of the
        fluid in the annulus, rather than the actual velocity itself.  Turbulent flow is far more erosive than
      laminar flow and  will destabilise sensitive formations.  It  is therefore usually desirable to have
      laminar flow around the drill pipe.
     Once the operating limits for annular velocity have been determined,  it is then possible to select
     pump pressure and flow rate based upon surface equipment limitations and the desirability of
      maintaining laminar flow in the annulus or limiting ECD (Equivalent Circulating Density).

5.2  Estimating Reynolds Number & Determining Flow Regime
     The type of flow behaviour of the fluid in the annulus is described by calculating  its Reynolds
     number (Re).  There are several methods of calculating the Reynolds number depending upon
      which rheological model is used to describe the fluid behaviour. Further information on rheological
     models is shown in Appendix 1.

        All of the equations in this section assume that the Power Law model is being applied.
      Before calculating the Reynolds number for a given section, the Power Law Constants, n and K,
     and the effective, or apparent, viscosity, µe, of the fluid must be derived. These will be calculated
      separately for pipe and annular flow.

5.2.1 Definitions
     Consistency factor (K, eq cp)
      Describes the viscosity of a fluid. Identical in concept to the PV. Describes dynamic flow only.

     Flow index (n, dimensionless)
      Describes the numeric relationship between a fluid's shear stress and shear rate on a log/log plot.
      Describes a fluid's degree of shear-thinning behaviour.

      Effective Viscosity (µe, cp)
      Describes the viscosity of the fluid flowing through a particular geometry. Fluid flowing through the
      annulus  will have a different effective viscosity to that flowing inside the drillpipe and hence,
       different values for n and K.

      Note: There are a number of different sets of equations used to define hydraulic parameters
     dependent upon the rheological model selected. The different sets of equations are valid for fluid
      behaviour in laminar and turbulent flow and differ only in their approach. Note that the examples

                                   Page 5 of 25                              Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 139 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

     shown below use the API method of calculation for Power Law fluids. The equations use the 600
     and 300 rpm viscometer readings which can be back calculated from the plastic viscosity and yield
       point values as follows:

     θ300    =       Plastic viscosity + yield point
     θ600    =       Yield point +  θ300
     θ3      =     10 second gel (using a hand-crank viscometer)
     θ3      =      θ3 (using a FANN 6-speed viscometer)

     Laminar Flow
    Mud particles move in straight lines parallel to the pipe or borehole walls. Adjacent mud layers have
       distinct shear planes between them and move past each other with no intermixing. Particles nearest
      the walls are effectively stationary but towards the centre move progressively faster as the effects of
        friction are reduced. Hence, fluid moving under laminar flow conditions has a conical velocity profile.

      Turbulent Flow
       In contrast to laminar flow conditions, the velocity profile of turbulent flow is almost flat. Turbulent
      flow occurs at higher flow rates when the shear planes between the mud layers are no longer
      discrete and the mud flows in a chaotic fashion.


          Velocity
          Profiles


                   velocity
                     profile
                                                                                        velocity
                                                                                               profile





                              Laminar                  Turbulent
                               Flow                   Flow

5.2.2 Pipe Flow Calculations

5.2.2.1. K and n
        High shear rate n and K values can be back-calculated from the 600 and 300 rpm readings and
         are used for calculations inside the drillpipe.

                           θ600 
        np = 3.32 × log        
                           θ3 00 

           511 × θ300
     K p =         np             511

        Where:       np     = flow index in the drillpipe
                     Kp    = consistency factor in the drillpipe, eq cp



                                   Page 6 of 25                              Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 140 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

5.2.2.2. Fluid Velocity

            0.408 × Q
      Vp =       2
              ID DP

        Where:      Vp    = velocity of fluid inside the drillpipe, ft/sec
              Q     = flow rate, gpm
                       IDDP   = inside diameter of drillpipe or drill collars, inches

5.2.2.3. Effective Viscosity




                                                                                               p                                                                  p −1                                                          n                             96 × Vp  n                                                       (3n p + 1)
      µ ep = 100 × K p ×                      ×                                                  ID DP          4n p   

        Where:        µep    = effective viscosity inside the drillpipe, cp

5.2.2.4. Reynolds Number

            928 × ID DP × Vp × W
      Re p =
                 µ ep

        Where:      Rep   = Reynolds number for fluid in the drillpipe or drill collars
           W     = mud density, ppg

5.2.3 Annular Flow Calculations

5.2.3.1. K and n
       Low shear n and K values can be back calculated from the 100 and 3 rpm readings and are
        used for annular calculations.

                             θ100 
        na = 0.657 × log       
                             θ3  

           511 × θ3
     K a =        n a             5.11

        Where:       na     = flow index in the annulus
                     Ka    = consistency factor in the annulus, eq cp

5.2.3.2. Fluid Velocity

             0.408 × Q
      Va =    2           2
            ID HOLE - OD DP

        Where:      Va    = velocity of fluid in the annulus, ft/sec
              Q     = flow rate, gpm

                                   Page 7 of 25                              Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 141 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

                       IDHOLE = hole diameter or inside diameter of casing, inches
                  ODDP  = outside diameter of drill pipe or drill collars, inches

5.2.3.3. Effective Viscosity


                                                      n a −1                 n a
                              144 × Va           (2n a + 1) 
      µ ea = 100 × K a ×                                    ×                                                  ID HOLE - OD DP         3n a   

        Where:        µea    = effective viscosity in the annulus, cp

5.2.3.4. Reynolds Number
            928 × (ID HOLE - OD DP ) × Va × W      Re a =
                     µ ea

        Where:      Rea   = Reynolds number for fluid in the annulus
           W     = mud density, ppg

5.2.4 Flow Regime and Critical Reynolds Number (Annulus)
     To determine the flow regime, the value obtained for the Reynolds number is compared with the
       following figures, based upon experiments conducted by observing the flow of a Newtonian fluid (in
       this case water) through a circular pipe:

                   Re                   Flow Regime
                        < 2000               Laminar flow
                       2000 - 4000             Transitional flow
                         >4000                Turbulent flow

     However, as drilling fluids do not conform to the properties of a true Newtonian fluid, the equations
     below have been developed to determine the critical Reynolds number at which the flow regime
      changes.

      Laminar flow:                        Rec = 3470 - 1370n

       Transitional flow:              3470 - 1370n < Rec < 4270 - 1370n

      Turbulent flow:                       Rec = 4270 - 1370n

     Where:         Rec   = critical Reynolds number in an annular section
                    n     = power law constant for the annulus

5.2.5 Critical Flow Rate
     Having derived the value of the critical Reynolds number, it is then possible to calculate the critical
       velocity, and hence the critical flow rate, beyond which laminar flow would begin to break down.





                                   Page 8 of 25                              Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 142 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


                                                                          1
                                                                        2 −n                                                           n                                                   2n + 1                    (3470 - 1370n )(100 ) K               
                                             3n         
    Vc =                                                     1−n 
                                                       144                  928 W (ID HOLE - OD DP )                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ID HOLE - OD DP                                                                                                                                

     Where:          Vc    = critical annular velocity
                    n     = power law constant for annulus
           W     = mud density, ppg
                       IDHOLE = hole diameter or ID of casing, inches
                  ODDP  = outside diameter of either the pipe or collars, inches

     The critical flow rate then can be calculated:
   Q c = 2.45 Vc (                 ID HOLE2     - OD DP2  )

     Where:         Qc    = critical flow rate, gpm
                      Vc    = critical annular velocity, ft/sec
                       IDHOLE = hole diameter or ID of casing, inches
                  ODDP  = outside diameter of either the pipe or collars, inches

5.3  System Pressure Losses
     The stand pipe pressure reading is a sum of all of the pressure losses within the system. Most such
      pressure losses represent wasted kinetic energy used in overcoming friction as the fluid circulates
      through restrictions in the system.  They are sometimes referred to as being 'parasitic' pressure
      losses. The pressure drop at the bit is, however, considered to be a useful loss of energy.

        PTotal    =        PSurface +  PDrillstring +  PAnnulus +  PBit

          PDrillstring  =          PDrillpipe +  PCollars + PDownhole Tools

      Pressure losses are functions of circulation rate, mud density, viscosity, pipe and hole diameter and
     system length. The maximum amount of friction loss that can be overcome is governed by surface
     equipment limitations. The general objective of optimising hydraulics is to minimise system losses
     and maximise cleaning power at the bit. The table below illustrates the effect of changing certain
      variables within the hydraulic system.

              Variables                System Losses           Horsepower at Bit
   Lower flow rate                           Decrease                   Decrease
   Larger flow area (e.g. pipe ID)               Decrease                     Increase
   Increased system length                       Increase                   Decrease
   Lower mud weight                         Decrease                     Increase
   Lower viscosity                           Decrease                     Increase
   Larger bit nozzle area                      Decrease                   Decrease

     The general procedure for calculating system pressure losses is:

       1.  Determine the fluid velocity (or Reynolds number) at the point of interest.
       2.  Calculate the critical velocity (or Reynolds number) to determine flow regime.
       3.  Choose the appropriate pressure loss equation (dependent upon choice of rheological model
        and flow regime).



                                   Page 9 of 25                              Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 143 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

5.3.1 Pressure Loss Equations
     As has been previously noted, the choice of rheological model and the flow regime of the drilling
        fluid determine which set of pressure drop equations should be used in order to calculate system
      pressure losses.

      For a Power Law fluid the pressure lost in an interval is given as:

                     f × V 2 × W × L
    PLOSS =
             25.81 × D eff

     Where            PLoss   = pressure loss in the interval, psi
                                       f      = friction factor, dimensionless
                V     = either fluid velocity in the annulus or in the drillpipe, ft/sec
           W     = mud density, ppg
                    L     = interval length, ft
                              Deff    = effective diameter, inches
                    Deff Drillpipe   = IDDP
                    Deff Annulus   = IDHOLE - ODDP

     The friction factor used in this equation depends upon the flow regime.

      For turbulent flow:

        a
         f =     b      Re

       Where:

           log n + 3.393                   1.75 - log n      a =                         b =
            50                         7

      For laminar flow:

       16
         f =
      Re

5.3.2 Optimising System Hydraulics
    No matter which optimisation process is used (the jet impact force or the hydraulic horsepower at
      the bit model),  it is important to remember that the maximum jet impact force and the hydraulic
     horsepower conditions are only valid for a fixed depth. However, deviations of as much 20% from
      the ideal 65% or 49% of total surface pressure do not change the hydraulic horsepower or jet
      impact force at the bit significantly.  This allows near maximum jet impact force or bit hydraulic
     horsepower to be maintained over a wide depth interval without having to change nozzle diameter.
          It is generally, however, best to optimise hydraulics for the end of the bit run to provide optimum
      botto4m hole cleaning where it is most required.

5.3.2.1. Basic System
       The most basic hydraulic system would consist only of drill pipe, collars and a bit. The simple
          optimisation process would include the following steps:




                                   Page 10 of 25                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 144 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

             -  Choose equipment to keep system losses at a minimum for the anticipated range of flow
             rates and depth.
             -  Decide which optimisation method to use for bottom hole cleaning. For example, selecting
            the jet impact force model for the shallow part of the hole and the hydraulic horsepower
          method for greater depths.
             -  Determine optimum flow rate for the system at the end of the bit run.
             -  Adjust flow rate to meet minimum requirements or maximum constraints.

5.3.2.2. System with Downhole Tools
     Most hydraulic systems will include an array of downhole tools such as mud motors, turbines, MWD
          / LWD sensors and the like.  These render the process of hydraulic optimisation rather more
      complicated than in the basic case as they can not be modelled by a set of simple equations.
     There are two ways to optimise a system with downhole tools. The most straightforward method is
       to subtract the expected pressure losses for the downhole tools from the pump pressure. This
      information should be provided by the product supplier. The rest of the system is then optimised
      using the lower value for pump pressure. One of the drawbacks of this method is that it is difficult to
       predict what the pressure drop across the tools will be as the flow rate has not yet been determined.
     The second method is to optimise the system as  if there were no tools in the drillstring. The
      pressure required for the tools is then subtracted from the available bit pressure. Results from this
     method give a higher flow rate with a corresponding larger nozzle area than method 1. As the flow
       rate is already known, this method gives an accurate pressure drop for the downhole tools. Both
      methods, however, provide maximum hole cleaning.

5.4  Optimising Bit Hydraulics
     The purpose of optimising  bit hydraulics  is to provide maximum hole cleaning and optimum
      penetration rates with the minimum amount of horsepower.

       Bit hydraulics will generally be optimised based on either jet impact force or hydraulic horsepower
       at the bit. The suitability of each method for a particular bit run will largely depend on previous
      experience in the area, borehole depth and downhole conditions. If offset bit performance data is
     somewhat limited, and no conclusions can be drawn, then hydraulics should initially be optimised
     on hydraulic horsepower. As a general rule though, in the shallow, larger diameter hole sections
     where penetration rates are high and high volumes of cuttings are generated, higher flow rates are
       beneficial for effective hole cleaning. Optimising hydraulics on jet impact force will provide 19.5%
      higher flow rates than the maximum hydraulic horsepower method. In the deeper, smaller diameter
      sections where penetration rates are lower and static and dynamic chip hold down forces become
      the major hydraulic concerns, higher jet velocities and bottom hole pressure become critical. Under
      these conditions maximising hydraulic horsepower provides 14.3% higher jet velocities and 34.7%
      higher pressures than the jet impact force method.

5.4.1 Bit Pressure Drop
     The pressure drop across a bit is defined as the difference between the pressure of the mud exiting
      the nozzles and the pressure of the fluid within the drillstring immediately prior to entering the bit. If
      the bit pressure drop is extremely high, for a given flow rate and mud weight, the fluid exiting the
      nozzles has a correspondingly high velocity. A lower pressure drop, on the other hand, under the
     same conditions of flow and mud weight, will result in fluid exiting the nozzles with lower velocity.
      Pressure drop is dependent upon flow rate, mud weight and the bit total flow area.

         Q 2 × W
    PBit =              2          2
         12031 × C n x TFA

     Where:             PBit    = pressure drop at the bit, psi
              Q     = flow rate, gpm

                                   Page 11 of 25                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 145 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

           W     = mud density, ppg
                    Cn    = nozzle discharge coefficient, usually taken as being 0.95
                 TFA   = total flow area, in2

5.4.2 Optimising Hydraulic Horsepower at the Bit
      This method assumes that cuttings removal depends upon the amount of fluid energy dissipated at
      the bit. Optimum penetration rates will therefore be achieved when hydraulic power per square inch
      (HSI) at the bit is maximised.

     HSI provides a measure of the hydraulic power consumed at the bit and is a function of flow rate
     and bit pressure drop, as well as hole diameter, and will, therefore, increase as the flow rate is
      increased. However, as flow rate becomes higher, the TFA will eventually need to be increased to
      maintain a suitable pressure drop, in which case the HSI will once again fall.
      Hydraulic horsepower per unit bit area is given by:

       Q × PBit    HSI =
         1714 × A

     Where:         HSI   = horsepower per square inch
                               PBit    = bit pressure drop, psi
              Q     = flow rate, gpm
                A     = hole area (π/4 x hole diameter2), in2

     HSI is a considered to be at a maximum when the pressure drop across the bit is 65% of the
       total surface pressure.

5.4.3 Optimising Jet Impact Force
      This method of optimisation makes the assumption that hole cleaning is maximised when the
        drilling fluid impacts the formation at maximum force. This method finds most application in larger
      diameter, upper hole sections where formations are softer and cuttings removal benefits from the
        'jetting' action.
     The jet impact force (JIF) is the force which is exerted by the fluid exiting the nozzles when the bit is
     on bottom. It is a function of jet velocity, mud density and flow rate. Jet velocity is the governing
      parameter in this method of optimising bit hydraulics. The higher the jet velocity the better the hole
      cleaning effect. The accepted minimum value for optimised bottom hole cleaning is approximately
     350 ft/sec.

      Q × W × Vn     JIF =
           1932

     Where:      Q     = flow rate, gpm
           W     = mud density, ppg
                     Vn    = jet velocity, ft/sec

      Q × 0.32
     Vn =
         TFA

      Jet impact force is maximised when the pressure drop across the bit is 49% of the total
      surface pressure.





                                   Page 12 of 25                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 146 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

6.0  Annular Hydraulics and Hole Cleaning

     The ability of a drilling fluid to  lift cuttings is affected by many factors including fluid density and
      rheology, annulus size and eccentricity, annular velocity and flow regime, pipe rotation and cuttings
      density and particle size and shape.

     The relationship between the various parameters is complicated and no one theory or set of
      equations can satisfactorily combine all of the observed phenomena. Nevertheless, the monitoring
       of cuttings generation and transport rates is imperative for a successful drilling operation.
6.1  General Factors Affecting Hole Cleaning
      •    Inclination
            Vertical and Near Vertical Wells  - in holes with an inclination less than 30°, cuttings are
            effectively suspended by fluid shear and cuttings beds do not form. Hole cleaning is general
           not problematic providing that mud rheology is adequate.
          Deviated wells (inclination greater than 30°) - cuttings tend to settle on the low side of the hole
          forming cuttings beds. These may either migrate up hole or slide down hole resulting in the
          annulus packing-off.
      •   Rheology
          Laminar  flow conditions  - increasing mud  viscosity improves hole  cleaning.  Particularly
            effective if low shear rheology and YP/PV ratio are high.
           Turbulent flow conditions - reducing viscosity will help remove cuttings.
      •    Yield Stress
       A measure of the low shear properties of a mud system, yield stress governs the size of
            cuttings which can be dynamically suspended.
      •  Mud Density
        Mud density affects the buoyancy of drilled cuttings. A heavier mud system enables cuttings to
               'float' more easily.
      •   Flow Rate
            In highly deviated holes, flow rate combined with mechanical agitation are important factors for
            effective  hole  cleaning.  In  vertical  wells,  increasing  annular  velocity  and/or  increased
           rheological properties will improve hole cleaning.

6.2  Cuttings Slip Velocity
     The cuttings slip velocity is the velocity at which a drilled cutting will fall through the mud column
      under the influence of gravity. In the simplest case, in order to effectively remove drilled cuttings,
      the velocity of the fluid in the annulus must exceed the cuttings slip velocity. The situation is made
     more complicated by flow conditions and friction along with the many other factors mentioned
      above. For instance, under laminar flow conditions, particles in the centre of the mud column will be
     moving at a velocity greater than the average annular velocity and will be recovered at surface
     more quickly than expected. However, frictional forces between the borehole / casing wall and the
        fluid means that drilled cuttings in that region will be moving upwards at a rate less than the
      average annular velocity. In contrast, during turbulent flow conditions, providing that the  fluid
       velocity exceeds the particle slip velocity, then solids will be removed continuously in all parts of the
      annulus. Turbulent flow therefore provides better hole cleaning than laminar flow but  is less
      desirable because of the increased chances of erosion.

     As a general guide,  it is recommended that slip velocity should be less than half of the annular
       velocity (averaged over the cross-section).

     As already noted, the relationship between the many factors affecting the rate of cuttings slip is
      complicated and researchers have developed a number of different methods of estimating it's value
     none of which are considered to be definitive. The most comprehensive methods are based upon
       particle Reynolds numbers, drag coefficients, particle density, shape and size and mud density and
      rheology. The following example, based upon a correlation devised by Walker and Mayes, 1975, is
     a simplified method.

                                   Page 13 of 25                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 147 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


Step 1: Find the shear stress developed by the particle
τ p = 7.9 × T x (20.8 - W )

Where:            τp     = particle shear stress, lb/100 ft2
             T     = particle thickness, inches
        W     = mud density, ppg

The table below provides an approximation  for the thickness and diameters of disk shaped
particles:

        Expected Penetration Rate   Particle Thickness   Particle diameter
                         (ft/hr)                  (inches)             (inches)
                  ≥ 60                       0.3                   0.6
                 30 - 60                     0.2                   0.3
                   15-30                      0.1                   0.4
                  ≤ 15                       0.1                   0.3

Step 2: Determine the boundary shear rate
The boundary shear rate is like a critical shear rate.  Particle shear rates above this value are
treated with calculations for the turbulent condition. Shear rates below use the laminar calculations.
The turbulent or laminar condition of the particle is not related to the turbulent or laminar flow
condition of the fluid in the annulus.

      186
γ b =
    d p × W

Where:            γb     = boundary shear rate, sec-1
                 dp     = particle diameter, inches
        W     = mud density, ppg

Step 3: Find the shear rate developed by the particle using the laminar power law constants
(na and Ka) for the mud.


         1

             a     τ pn
γ b =
   K a

Where:            γp     = particle shear rate, sec-1
                    τp     = particle shear stress from step 1, lb/100 ft2
                 na     = flow index in the annulus
                Ka    = consistency factor in the annulus, eq cp

Step 4: determine the slip velocity for the laminar or turbulent condition.

Laminar Condition
If γp <  γb, the slip velocity is determined by:

                  γ p × d p
Vs = 1.22 × τ p ×
         W


                              Page 14 of 25                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 148 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

     Where:          Vs    = slip velocity, ft/min
                            γp     = particle shear rate, sec-1
                           τp     = particle shear stress from, lb/100 ft2
                        dp     = particle diameter, inches
           W     = mud density, ppg

      Turbulent Condition
          If γp >  γb, the slip velocity is determined by:

         16.62 × τ p
    Vs =
       W

     Where:          Vs    = slip velocity, ft/min
                           τp     = particle shear stress from, lb/100 ft2
           W     = mud density, ppg

6.3  Cuttings Transport Velocity
     The cuttings transport velocity for each different hole geometry is obtained by subtracting the slip
       velocity of the cuttings from the annular velocity in that particular section.

    Vt = Va - Vs

     Where:           Vt     = cuttings transport, ft/min
                     Va    = annular velocity, ft/min
                      Vs    = slip velocity, ft/min

6.4  Cuttings Transport Efficiency
     Perhaps more important than the actual  cuttings  transport  velocity  is the  cuttings transport
       efficiency. This is simply the ratio of cuttings transport to annular velocity. Please note that the
      equation shown here is valid for hole angles less than 30°. Evaluation of hole cleaning for wells of
      higher inclination is much more complicated as the drilled cuttings may form a cuttings bed on the
      low side of the hole.

       Vt    E t =   x 100
       Va

     Where:           Et     = transport efficiency, %
                          Vt     = cuttings transport, ft/min
                     Va    = annular velocity, ft/min

6.5  Cuttings Concentration
      Note: valid for hole angles less than 30°.
     The concentration of cuttings in the annulus depends upon the transport efficiency as well as the
      volumetric flow rate and the rate at which cuttings are generated at the bit (ROP and hole size
      dependent). Experience has shown that cuttings concentration in excess of four or five volume %
     can lead to pack-off, tight hole or stuck pipe incidents. When drilling soft formations, the cuttings
      concentration may easily exceed 5% by volume  if penetration rates are not controlled. Some
      operators recommend a maximum cuttings concentration of 4% by volume.
      Cuttings concentration is given by:



                                   Page 15 of 25                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 149 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

       ROP x ID HOLE   C a =             x 100
         14.71 x E t x Q

     Where:         Ca    = cuttings concentration, vol %
               ROP   = rate of penetration, ft/hr
                       IDHOLE  = hole diameter, inches
                         Et     = transport efficiency, %
              Q     = flow rate, gpm

    When cuttings concentration exceeds 4 or 5 % by volume, the effect upon hydrostatic pressure and
      equivalent circulating density can by substantial. The change in hydrostatic pressure depends upon
      the density of the cuttings as well as their concentration in that particular hole section.
     The effective static mud density due to the cuttings concentration in that section of hole is given by:
                     C a  W (1 - C a )   W e =  SG × 8.34 ×      +
                      100     100

     Where:       We    = effective mud weight, ppg
                  SGc   = specific gravity of the cuttings
                    Ca    = cuttings concentration, vol %
           W     = mud density, ppg

     The effect is most pronounced when drilling top hole sections. The following conditions cause an
      increase in cuttings concentration:
      •      large diameter holes drilled at high ROP
      •     pumps unable to provide sufficient annular velocities
      •      rapid mud system building rate may yield insufficient viscosity

          It is clear that an increase in cuttings concentration in the annulus results in a corresponding
      increase in effective mud density.

6.6  Equivalent Circulating Density (ECD)
    When the drilling fluid is circulating through the wellbore, the circulating pressure must be sufficient
       to overcome not only the friction losses through the drillstring and bit, but also the hydrostatic
      pressure of the fluid in the annulus and the friction losses through the annulus. The pressure to
      required to overcome the  total  friction losses in the annulus, when added to the hydrostatic
      pressure of the fluid, gives the equivalent circulating density as follows:

           Pa + W      ∑   ECD =
           0.052 × TVD

     Where:       ECD   = equivalent circulating density, ppg
               ∑ Pa  = sum of friction pressure losses in the annulus (corresponds the pump
                                pressure minus the pressure losses through the surface equipment,
                                           drillstring and bit), psi
                TVD   = true vertical depth of hole, ft
           W     = mud density, ppg

     The majority of drilling situations may not be limited by frictional ECD. Exceptions are in the case of
        drilling slimhole wells. ECD is particularly aggravated by deep, slim holes using heavy mud weights
      close to the formation fracture pressure. The flow rates selected may be lowered to prevent loss of
       circulation.


                                   Page 16 of 25                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 150 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

6.7  Equivalent Circulating Density (ECD) with Cuttings
    A complete description of the extra pressure to which the open hole is exposed combines the effect
       of friction (ECD) and the effect of cuttings loading (effective mud density).
                    Pa               C a  W (1 - C a )           ∑   ECD + Cuttings =           +  SG c × 8.34 ×      +
                     0.052 × TVD             100     100

     Where:       ECD   = equivalent circulating density, ppg
               ∑ Pa   = sum of friction pressure losses in the annulus, psi
                TVD   = true vertical depth of hole, ft
                  SGc   = specific gravity of the cuttings
                    Ca    = cuttings concentration, vol %
           W     = mud density, ppg

7.0  Hole Cleaning Guidelines

      Additional information can be found in the Transocean SedcoForex Driller’s Stuck Pipe Handbook
      Section 2.

7.1  Guidelines for Vertical Holes
      •  Rheology is very important in transporting cuttings in vertical or deviated holes. Large diameter
          holes, in particular, cannot be cleaned by velocity alone. Providing that the mud rheology is
          correct, hole cleaning is not generally a problem in such wells. Annular velocity is generally
         greater than the cuttings slip velocity and so cuttings are effectively removed from the hole. To
        ensure that a low slip velocity is achieved, these wells are usually drilled with viscous, high yield
          point mud systems.



                                              Particle Velocity




                                                        In  vertical wells, annular velocity  is generally
                                      much higher than the cuttings slip velocity and
                                                             drilled cuttings are effectively removed from the
                                                 annulus.

                              Mud Velocity



                                    Vertical Well

      •  Circulate at least 1.3 x bottoms-up for vertical wells. Monitor returns at the shakers ensuring the
          rate of return has decreased to acceptable levels before tripping.
      •  Limit the use of high viscosity pills. Instead, adjust the properties of the active system to provide
        optimum hole cleaning. High weight pills should not be used in vertical holes.
      •  Reciprocate rather than rotate the pipe prior to tripping. This helps remove cuttings from
         stagnant zones near the wellbore wall.
      •  Pull through tight spots only if the pipe is free going down. Agree a maximum allowable overpull
           in advance and work up progressively towards  it, ensuring that the pipe  is free to move
        downwards on each occasion. Stop and circulate if overpulls become excessive.
      •  Only backream if absolutely necessary. Backreaming may result in hole pack-off and stuck pipe.
               It can also mask the onset of potentially serious hole problems which may have been detected at
        a much earlier stage had backreaming not taken place.

                                   Page 17 of 25                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 151 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


7.2  Guidelines for Deviated and Extended-Reach Wells
     The measures noted above are also valid for the effective cleaning of deviated wells. However, the
     geometry of deviated and extended-reach holes makes adequate hole cleaning rather more difficult
      than for vertical or near-vertical wells. Many of the problems encountered are associated with the
      nature of the cuttings beds which form on the low side of the hole.





                        Particle Velocity
                                                      In deviated holes, cuttings will 'slip' to the lower side
                                                      of the wellbore.  In this situation, the velocity of the
                                                              drilling fluid has to be higher in order to keep the
                                                     cutting moving up towards the surface.




                                    Mud Velocity

                   Directional Well


7.2.1 Low-Angle Sections (10° - 40°)
      Cuttings Bed Characteristics:
      Cuttings beds form on the low side of the hole and are subject to 'particle recycling' which has a
      detrimental effect upon hole cleaning.





               4


                             3



                          1


                                   2





       1. Because of increasing inclination, the cutting is forced toward the low side of the annulus, where
                 it travels downward due to a lack of lifting force in the flow (low velocity near the wall).
       2. At some point, due to a higher shear stress, the cutting is lifted and re-enters the high-velocity
         region at the middle of the annulus.
       3. Then, it is swept upward and continues to travel until
       4.  its tendency to drop overcomes the lifting force in the flow and it is forced toward the low side of
         the annulus again.

      This process can be repeated many times resulting in the cutting’s shape being altered through
       grinding. Measures used to minimise this problem include viscous sweeps.


                                   Page 18 of 25                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 152 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

     Compared with vertical sections, low-angle sections require higher annular velocities for efficient
      hole cleaning. For this type of well section, laminar flow dominates cuttings transport. Therefore,
       viscosity,  yield  point and  initial  gel  strengths have a  significant  effect on annular  cuttings
      concentration and hole cleaning efficiency.

      Field Guidelines:
      •  General use of laminar flow.
      •  Maintain a high yield point and gel strength to reduce the settling of cuttings when pumps are off.
      •  Always ensuring that the hole is clean before turning the pumps off.
      •  Maximise YP/PV ratio.
      •  Use viscous sweeps to reduce the effects of particle recycling.

7.2.2 Critical-Angle Sections (40° - 60°)
      Cuttings Bed Characteristics:
       In well sections with inclinations greater than 40 degrees, cuttings do not recycle as readily as in
      lower-angle sections. This is because gravity tends to hold them down on the low side of the hole.
      Well sections with inclinations between 40° and 60° are considered critical, not only because a
       cuttings bed develops, but also because it is unstable and prone to sliding downward (avalanching).

     The consequence of avalanching is an instantaneous build-up of cuttings around the drillpipe and/or
    BHA which, if not treated properly, can result in stuck pipe. Also,
      •  Turbulent flow exhibits a desirable, eroding effect on cuttings beds.
      •  Pipe movement (rotation/reciprocation) mechanically disturbs cuttings beds.

      Field Guidelines:
       In the well sections over 40 degrees, attention must focus on minimising cuttings beds.
      •  For the range of intermediate inclinations (40° - 60°), turbulent flow is recommended.  Since
          cuttings  transport  in  turbulent  flow  is not  affected by  rheological  properties, lower mud
        parameters (i.e. YP, PV) may be used. However, static mud parameters such as gel strength
         are usually desirable even  if turbulent flow is preferable.    If turbulent flow cannot be used
        because of other adverse factors, like wellbore instability, annular velocity should be kept as
         high as possible.
      •  Rotating and/or reciprocating drillpipe has a mechanical, destructive influence on the cuttings
        bed (this influence is the main factor that provides a higher cleaning rate for higher RPM). As
         pipe rotation is typically governed by directional drilling needs, periodic wiper trips should be
         considered.
      •  Combination sweeps (low viscosity/high density) are effective at eroding the cuttings bed, and
          carrying the cuttings to surface.

7.2.3 High-Angle Sections (> 60°)
      Cuttings Bed Characteristics:
      At high angles of inclination the formation of a cuttings bed  is almost instantaneous, and  its
      thickness is governed primarily by annular velocity. The cuttings bed that forms at angles greater
      than 60 degrees is stable, this means  it will not avalanche. The waving, vortex-like, character of
       turbulent flow has a destructive influence on the bed being formed. There is a tendency for cuttings
       to be withdrawn (lifted) from the bed and displaced upwards in the annulus, where such a process
    may occur again. This kind of interaction, together with the flat velocity-profile typical of turbulent
       flow, leads to better hole cleaning.
      Pipe movement (rotation/reciprocation) mechanically disturbs cuttings beds.

      Field Guidelines:
      •  Turbulent flow is preferable in high-angle wells. Generally, the same recommendations as those
         described for intermediate-angle wells are applicable in this region for turbulent flow. However,



                                   Page 19 of 25                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 153 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

         the requirements to ensure a mud gel strength are less important.   If turbulent flow cannot be
         achieved, the YP/PV ratio should be maintained as high as possible.
      •  Again, rotating and/or reciprocating drillpipe has a mechanical, destructive influence on the
          cuttings bed.  It is this influence that provides a higher cleaning rate for higher RPM, particularly
          at high inclinations where a considerable cuttings bed is formed. Pipe rotation > 120 RPM is
          highly recommended. Periodic wiper trips should be used  if drillpipe rotation is restricted. The
        use of rotary steerable directional tools may prove helpful.
      •  Combination sweeps (low viscosity/high density) are effective at eroding the cuttings bed, and
          carrying the cuttings to surface. The effectiveness of a cuttings-bed-maintenance program can
        be determined through several indicators.

7.3  Poor Hole Cleaning Indicators
    A number of rig-site indicators can be used as a guide to how effectively the hole is being cleaned.
     These include:
      •  Shape and size of cuttings at the shakers - small, well rounded cuttings may indicate extended
         periods of regrinding down hole - an indication of the presence of cuttings beds.
      •  Rate of return of cuttings versus expected volume.
      •  Increased torque and drag.
      •  High pick-up weight.
      •  Poor weight transfer. A higher than normal surface weight is required to get a pressure-drop
        response from the mud motor.
      •   Difficulty orienting the motor, due to excessive friction between the cuttings and the drillstring.
      •  Excessively ground cuttings, due to extended particle recycling and drillpipe interaction with the
          cuttings bed.

7.4  Effects of Mud Type on Hole Cleaning Efficiency
      •  In highly deviated wells, and for lower values of yield point and plastic viscosity, cleaning
        performance for both mud types is roughly the same. However, at higher values of yield point
        and plastic viscosity water-base muds provide better cleaning. The general observation is that
        an increase in mud yield point and plastic viscosity results in increased cuttings concentration for
         both muds.
      •  As a result from this higher cuttings concentration, torque requirements for both muds increase
          with increasing yield point and plastic viscosity, at higher hole inclinations.
      •  Hole-cleaning performance of oil-base muds at critical angles (40° to 60°), is reduced by severe
          cuttings bed avalanching (due to reduced friction).

7.5  Hole Cleaning 'Aids'
    Mud rheology, density, annular velocity and pipe movement are seen as being key to the success
       of efficiently cleaning the wellbore. The importance of sound operational practices and vigilant
      monitoring of the hole condition can not be underestimated. There are, however, tools available
      which, when used appropriately, can help to predict, and possibly alleviate, the onset of hole
      cleaning problems.
      •  Hole Cleaning Software Packages
       Can be used to predict the likelihood and potential location of the build up of any cuttings beds.
        Should be used with caution, making sure that results are combined with past experience and
          offset data.
      •  Cuttings Bed Impellers / 'Enhanced Performance' Drillpipe / Agitators
             Lift the cuttings away from the low side of the hole into the area of higher annular velocity but,
         unless mud rheology and other conditions are sufficient, they are likely to drop out of suspension
        and form beds higher up the hole.
      •  'Pressure While Drilling' Tools
          In recent years, tools have been developed which enable downhole pressure measurements to
        be taken in real-time. The 'Pressure While  Drilling' (PWD) tools give an indication of any

                                   Page 20 of 25                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 154 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
              DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

changes in equivalent circulating density. PWD tools have a number of potential applications
including:
-  LOT
-  Lost circulation detection
-  Flow / kick detection and monitoring
-  Swab / surge information
-  Mud property monitoring
-  Measurements of differential pressure for overall drilling performance optimisation
-  Underbalanced drilling
-  Hole cleaning and stability monitoring
By accurately measuring ECD whilst drilling, these tools allow engineers to assess the condition
of the hole before serious hole cleaning problems occur.





                           Page 21 of 25                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 155 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

APPENDIX 1

TFA Chart


          n × π × D 2    TFA =
             4

    Where:      n    = number of nozzles
            D    = nozzle diameter in 32nds of an inch

                          Total Flow Area (TFA) of Standard Nozzles (in.²)
 Nozzle                            Number of Nozzles
  Size
           1       2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9      10    (in)
   7/32    0.038    0.075    0.113    0.150    0.188    0.225    0.263    0.301    0.338    0.376
   8/32    0.049    0.098    0.147    0.196    0.245    0.295    0.334    0.393    0.442    0.491
   9/32    0.062    0.124    0.186    0.249    0.311    0.373    0.435    0.497    0.559    0.621
  10/32    0.077    0.153    0.230    0.307    0.383    0.460    0.537    0.614    0.690    0.767
  11/32    0.093    0.186    0.278    0.371    0.464    0.557    0.650    0.742    0.835    0.928
  12/32    0.110    0.221    0.331    0.442    0.552    0.663    0.773    0.884    0.994    1.104
  13/32    0.130    0.259    0.389    0.518    0.648    0.778    0.907    1.037    1.167    1.296
  14/32    0.150    0.301    0.451    0.601    0.752    0.902    1.052    1.203    1.353    1.503
  15/32    0.173    0.345    0.518    0.690    0.863    1.035    1.208    1.381    1.553    1.726
  16/32    0.196    0.393    0.589    0.785    0.982    1.178    1.374    1.571    1.767    1.963
  17/32    0.222    0.443    0.665    0.887    1.108    1.330    1.552    1.773    1.995    2.217
  18/32    0.249    0.497    0.746    0.994    1.243    1.491    1.740    1.988    2.237    2.485
  19/32    0.277    0.554    0.831    1.108    1.384    1.661    1.938    2.215    2.492    2.769
  20/32    0.307    0.614    0.920    1.227    1.534    1.841    2.148    2.454    2.761    3.068
  22/32    0.371    0.742    1.114    1.485    1.856    2.227    2.599    2.970    3.341    3.712
  24/32    0.442    0.884    1.325    1.767    2.209    2.651    3.093    3.534    3.976    4.418
  26/32    0.519    1.037    1.556    2.074    2.593    3.111    3.630    4.148    4.667    5.185
  28/32    0.601    1.203    1.804    2.405    3.007    3.608    4.209    4.811    5.412    6.013





                                   Page 22 of 25                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 156 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

APPENDIX 2

Rheological Models

Introduction
A rheological model is a description of the relationship between the shear stress (τ) experienced by the
fluid and the shear rate (γ). Because the rheology of the drilling fluid directly affects the circulating system
pressure losses, the more accurately the rheological models used to describe the drilling fluid represent
the fluid, the more precise the hydraulic analysis can be.

Rheological Terms
Term         Symbol   Unit           Definition
Shear stress       τ      Lbs/100ft2   The force per unit area required to move a fluid at a given shear
                                              rate. Measured on a viscometer by the dial deflection at a given
                                     shear speed.
Shear rate          γ      Sec-1       The change in fluid velocity divided by the channel width through
                                    which the fluid is flowing in laminar flow
Shear speed         Rpm       The rotational speed of a standard oilfield viscometer
Viscosity        µ      Centipoise   The shear stress divided by the shear rate. For any fluid, can either
                                 be measured either at a single point or over a range of shear values
Rheogram                                Plot of shear stress versus shear rate (see examples later)
Apparent         µa     Centipoise   The viscosity used to describe a fluid flowing through a particular
viscosity                            geometry
Yield Point     YP     Lbs/100ft2   The force required to initiate flow. The calculated value of the shear
                      τy                    stress when the rheogram is extrapolated to the y axis at γ = 0 sec-1
                                   Note – YP  is a time independent measurement and  is usually
                                      associated with Bingham fluids
Yield stress        τ0      Lbs/100ft2   The force required to initiate flow. The calculated value of the shear
                                         stress when the rheogram is extrapolated to the y axis at γ = 0 sec-1
                                   Note – YP  is a time independent measurement and  is usually
                                      associated in the Hershel-Bulkley model as τ0 and in the Bingham
                                  model as YP. It can also be viewed as a zero time gel strength
Gel strength              Centipoise   Time dependent measurement of a fluid’s shear stress under static
                                          conditions. Commonly measured after 10 sec and 10 min intervals.
Plastic                   Centipoise    Contribution  to  fluid  viscosity under dynamic  flow  conditions.
viscosity                              Related to the size, shape and number of particles in a moving fluid.
                                       Calculated from the 600 and 300rpm speeds using a rheometer
Flow index       n     None       The numerical relationship between a fluid’s shear stress and shear
                                           rate on a log/log plot. Describes a fluid’s degree of shear thinning
                                       behaviour. Used to describe pseudo-plastic fluid behaviour.
Consistency     K     eq cps      The viscosity of a flowing  fluid identical  in concept to the PV.
index                      lbs/100ft2se  Viscous effects due to a  fluid’s yield stress are not part of the
                            cn            consistency index as the latter relates to dynamic flow only. Used to
                                       describe pseudo-plastic fluid behaviour.


Newtonian Fluids

For a Newtonian fluid the ratio of shear stress to shear rate is a constant. This constant is the viscosity of
the fluid (µ).
           τ     µ =
            γ

                                   Page 23 of 25                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 157 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

Typical Newtonian fluids are gases at ambient temperature and pressure and most simple fluids (like
water).

Non-Newtonian Fluids
All other fluids are termed non-Newtonian. For these fluids the relationship between shear stress and
shear rate can be defined as follows

       τ = A + B γ n

Where A, B and n are constants depending upon the model in use.
The following graph shows the variations in the most common models currently in use.


                     Common Rheological Models


                                                           Herschel-Buckley
                                                                        Bingham


                                                                                              Typical Drilling Fluids




                                                                      Power Law

                                                                                          Newtonian
                 Shear stress





                                                      Shear rate

Bingham Plastic
For a Bingham Plastic fluid (close approximation to most water based muds)
       τ = YP + (PV × γ )

       where

     PV = θ600 - θ300     and     YP = θ300 - PV

Power Law
For a Power Law fluid (approximation to oil and pseudo oil muds)

       τ = K γ n

       where




                                   Page 24 of 25                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 158 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                    DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

                          θ600        n = 3.32 × log        
                          θ3 00 

          511 × θ300
     K =          n            511

Herschel Buckley
For a Herschel Buckley (or modified Power Law or Yield Power Law) fluid (closer approximation to oil and
pseudo oil muds)

       τ = YP + K γ n





                                   Page 25 of 25                             Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 159 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

                  SECTION 8

               DRILL STRING DESIGN

     Contents
1.0      Drill String Components                                                     2
  1.1  Kelly or Top Drive System (TDS)                                              2
  1.2  Drill Pipe (DP)                                                             2
  1.3 Heavy Weight Drill Pipe (HWDP)                                              2
  1.4  Drill Collars (DC)                                                           2
  1.5  Other Downhole Tools                                                       2
  1.6  Drill Bit                                                                   2
2.0      Drill String Considerations                                                    2
  2.1  Drill Pipe                                                                 2
  2.2  Drill Collars                                                               3
  2.3  Stabilisation                                                               4
  2.4  Jars                                                                     4
  2.5  Accelerators                                                              5
  2.6 Shock Subs                                                               5
  2.7  Hole Openers and Under-Reamers                                            5
3.0      Drill String Design                                                          6
  3.1  Objectives                                                                6
  3.2  Assumptions                                                              7
  3.3  Design Factors                                                            7
4.0    Design for Vertical to Moderate Angle Wellbores                                  8
  4.1  Design Stages                                                             8
  4.2  Drill Collar Size                                                            8
  4.3 BHA Connections / Features                                                  8
  4.4  Stabiliser and Jar Placement                                                 10
  4.5  Length of BHA section                                                      10
  4.6  Tool Joint Torsional Capacity                                                12
  4.7  Stiffness Ratio                                                            12
  4.8  Drill Pipe Tensile Design                                                    13
  4.9  Burst Pressure                                                            14
  4.10   Collapse Pressure                                                       15
  4.11  Combined Loading                                                       15
  4.12    Stability Forces and Drill Pipe Buckling                                       18
  4.13   Slip Crushing                                                           18
  4.14  Welded components                                                     19
5.0    Design for Extended Reach Wellbores                                         19
  5.1  General Design Considerations                                               19
  5.2  Estimating Drill String Loads                                                 20
  5.3  Drag Coefficient                                                           20
  5.4  Critical Hole Angle                                                         20
  5.5  Torsion                                                                  21
  5.6 Non Standard Joints                                                       21
  5.7  Factors Affecting Torsion Capacity                                            21
  5.8  Fatigue in ERD Wells                                                       21
6.0    Fatigue                                                                  22
  6.1  Sources of Fatigue-Inducing Cyclic Stresses                                    22
  6.2  Mitigation                                                                22
  6.3  Critical Rotary Speeds                                                      22
  6.4  Corrosion in Water Based Drilling Fluid                                         23
  6.5  Drill String Operation Practices                                               23
APPENDIX 1                                                                   25
  Calculation of BSR                                                             25
  Calculation of Tool Joint Make Up Torque                                          25





                                   Page 1 of 28                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 160 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


1.0  Drill String Components

     The principal components of the drill string are:

1.1  Kelly or Top Drive System (TDS)
          It is not exactly part of the drill string but transmits and absorbs torque to or from the drill string
      while carrying all the tensile load of the drill string.

1.2  Drill Pipe (DP)
      Transmits power by rotating motion from the rig floor to the bit and allows mud circulation.

     They are subject to complex stresses and loads as is the rest of the drill string. Drill pipe should
      never be run in compression or used for bit weight except in high angle and horizontal holes
     where stability of the string and absence of buckling must be confirmed by using modelling
      software.

1.3  Heavy Weight Drill Pipe (HWDP)
     They make the transition between drill pipe and drill collars, thus avoiding an abrupt change in
      cross sectional area. They are also used with drill collars to provide weight on the bit, especially
       in 6” or 8½” holes where the buckling effect of the HWDP due to compression is minimal.

    HWDP reduce the stiffness of the BHA, they are also easier / faster to handle than DC and more
      important reduce the possibility of differential sticking.

1.4  Drill Collars (DC)
      Provide weight on the bit, keeping the drill pipe section in tension during drilling. The neutral
       point should be located at the top of the drill collars section: 75 to 85% (maximum) of the drill
       collars section should be available to be put under compression (Available Weight on Bit).

1.5  Other Downhole Tools
       Include: Stabilisers, Crossover, Jars, MWD, Under Reamer, etc.

     They all have different functions but two major common points: Their placement is crucial when
      designing the drill string and they introduce “irregularity” in the drill string i.e. different ID / OD
     and different mechanical characteristics (torsion / flexion, etc.), which must be taken in account
     when designing the drillstring.

1.6  Drill Bit
     See Section 6 Bits.

2.0  Drill String Considerations

2.1  Drill Pipe
     The main factors involved in the design of a drill pipe string are:

      •   Collapse and burst resistance.
      •   Tensile strength (Tension).
      •   Torque (Torsion).
      •   Resistance against crushing by action of the slips.
      •   Presence of aggressive fluids (e.g. H2S and CO2)/resistance to corrosion.

     The forces acting on the tubulars of the drill string include:


                                   Page 2 of 28                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 161 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


      •   Tension, the combined weight of  drill collars and drill pipe plus any overpull. An overpull
          safety margin should be available to pull on a stuck string.
      •   Torsion, high torque values can be obtained in tight hole conditions. The recommended tool
             joint make-up torque should be used and not exceed.
      •   Fatigue in corrosive environment
      •   Fatigue associated with mechanical notches.
      •   Cyclic Stress Fatigue, while rotating through crooked holes. Dog leg severity of more than
        3deg/30m (3deg/100ft) should be avoided if possible.
      •   Abrasive Friction
      •   Vibration, at critical rotary speeds.

       Different grades of steel are available to meet different hole requirements, the most common are
     G105 and S135. G105  is most commonly used in shallow or H2S environments. S135  is
      considered a standard for offshore operations. U150 is a relatively new grade that is being used
       for deepwater operations.

      Hardfacing (also  called hard banding)  of  tool  joints  is performed  to  limit the degree  of
       circumferential wear produced on the tool joint. Hardfacing is proven to be efficient but  it also
     can provide considerable casing wear, leading to a reduction in casing performance properties.

     Care must be exercised in the use of hard banding materials (generally from tungsten carbide).
    A smooth hard banding weld, flush with the outside diameter of the tool  joint should be
       preferred. The recommended hard banding is ARNCO 200XT or ARMACOR M.

          If new hard banded pipe or pipe that has been recently re-hard banded is being used, every
       effort should be made to run this pipe in the open hole section. This will result in a degree of
     roughness being taken off the new surface finish and will minimise any adverse impact on
      casing wear.

     Enhanced Performance Drill-Pipe  is a “stabilised”  drill pipe that can be used in deviated  /
       horizontal wells to:

      •   Help prevent differential sticking
      •  Reduce torque and drag
      •  Reduce wall contact and tooljoint wear
      •   Help to disturb cutting beds

2.2  Drill Collars
        Drill collars are used to apply weight to the bit. Their large wall thickness gives them a greater
      resistance to buckling than DP. The neutral point should be located at the top of the drill collars
      section (never in the DP section), 75 to 85% (maximum) of the drill collars section should be
      under compression (this will include HWDP if utilised).

     The lower part of the drill collar section is under compression, therefore subject to buckling. This
      generates high stresses and potential fatigue failure, particularly at the connections.

     The clearance between  drill  collars and the wellbore  is smaller than with DP, therefore
      increasing the possibility of differential sticking. If  it is thought to be a potential problem, spiral
         drill collars can be used to reduce the contact area with the wellbore and consequently the
     chance of differential sticking.

       In deviated holes, to avoid sticking of the drilling assembly, the minimum number of drill collars
      should be used (and these should be of the spiral type). Heavy Weight Drill Pipe in conjunction
      with undergauge stabilisers, should be used to substitute the drill collar weight.





                                   Page 3 of 28                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 162 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

2.3  Stabilisation

2.3.1 Stabilisers
       Full gauge stabilisers, provide a fixed stand-off distance from the wall of the hole and keep the
         drill collars concentric with the wellbore, thus reducing the buckling and bending. Stabilisers may
     however increase torque and drag.

2.3.1.1 Recommended Type of Stabiliser
         •  The integral blade stabiliser is the preferred type of stabiliser.
         •   Although integral blade stabilisers are generally preferred, welded blade stabilisers can
           be used for conductor and surface hole depending on the formation. Generally soft
             formations and in any cases, above the kick of point for directional wells.
         •   Replaceable sleeve stabilisers are to be used only in areas of the world where logistics is
           a real problem (economical considerations). Their main disadvantage is that they restrict
             the flow circulation in smaller size hole.

       The position, size (full, under or Adjustable Gage Stabiliser) and number of the stabilisers in
         the bottom hole assembly are determined by the directional drilling requirement. In the
           vertical section their purpose is to maintain the drift angle as low as possible.

         Note:
         •  The near bit stabiliser may be replaced by a full size roller reamer if excessive torque is
             experienced.
         •  Do not place a stabiliser at the transition from drill collars to HWDP.
         •  The use of stabilisers inside casing should be avoided as much as possible (or limited to
           a short period of time). e.g. while drilling out cement.

2.3.2 Roller Reamers
       Roller reamers can be used for drill string stabilisation where it is difficult to maintain hole gauge
     and in hard, deep formation where torque presents a problem.

       Roller reamers do not stabilise as well as integral blade stabilisers. More walk is experienced
     when they are used, especially if a near bit roller reamer is used. Used with a building assembly,
      they often increase the building rate.

     The type of cutters, will depend on, the formation type. The same roller reamer body can be
     used for different applications.

2.4  Jars
     Double acting hydraulic jars are preferred. Jars are generally used from below conductors or
      surface casing.

     The number of drilling hours and jarring hours should be recorded to enable replacement at the
     recommended time (this must be provided by the manufacturer). This varies depending upon
      the manufacturer, hole size, size of jar and deviation.

2.4.1 Jar Position
     Run a jar placement program, then optimise for position considering all aspect of the BHA:

      •  The location of the neutral point in the drillstring should be known and Jars kept out of this
          area.
      •  When appropriate (see below), place jars in the drill collar section above the top stabiliser.
          Jars should not be run directly next to a stabiliser (minimum of one collar between them).
      •   Place a couple of drill collars above the jar for hammer weight where possible. HWDP are
            flexible and will not transmit a blow downwards as well as drill collars.
      •  The anticipated problem can also influence where to locate the jar:


                                   Page 4 of 28                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 163 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

           1.      If  it is differential sticking or keyseating, then the jar should be run in the HWDP to
               avoid being stuck with the rest of the BHA.
           2.      If it is stabilisers “balling-up” and/or hole swelling then the jars should be positioned in
               the collar above the top stabiliser.
           3.  When drilling in new area where common hole problems have not yet been identified,
             a good compromise is to run some smaller OD spiral drillcollars above the jar.
      •    Jars have a pump open force which must be overcome when cocking the jar.
        Pump open force = Pressure drop below Jars x Washpipe Area
         The Washpipe area can be obtained from manufacturers data book.

2.5  Accelerators
      Accelerators (also called Jar Boosters) are run in the string above jars, they are used to increase
      the impact force exerted by a jar.

     They consist of a slip joint that, as extension of the tool occurs cause further compression of an
       inert gas (generally nitrogen) in a high pressure chamber. Then, the gas under pressure forces
      the tool back to its original length. It allows the drill collars below the booster to move rapidly up
      the hole.

      Accelerators are useful in a fishing string or drilling assembly, particularly in high angle holes
     where the string is in contact with the side of the hole and large amounts of friction may be
      developed.

2.6  Shock Subs
     Shock subs are placed in the drill string, ideally directly above the bit to absorb vibration and
     shock loads.

     They are useful, especially at shallow depth, when drilling hard rocks, broken formations or
       intermittent hard and soft streaks to limit the wear and failure of the drill string components
    (MWD, bit, etc.).

2.7  Hole Openers and Under-Reamers
      Hole Openers and under-reamers are used to enlarge holes. An under reamer is never as
      robust as a hole opener but can pass through obstructions (e.g. casing string) of a smaller
      diameter than the hole it will drill.

2.7.1 Hole Openers

2.7.1.1 Applications
     Use to enlarge a pilot hole, which may have been required for one of the following reasons:

      •    A core was required, standard coring equipment size start at 12 ¼”.
      •      High quality of wireline log was required which is not likely to be achieved in big diameter
              hole.
      •          It is easier to control the trajectory of a smaller hole, especially in very soft formation.
      •       Drilling through what may be a pressure transition zone or a gas pocket. In small hole,
               circulation bottoms up take less time and kick are easier to control due to the reduced
            volume.

    A hole opener may also be required  if the diameter of the hole has been reduced by the
      formation expanding into  it, so that the  full size bit can no longer pass.  It may happen in
       particular in sections containing plastic shales or salt.

2.7.1.2 Guidelines For Use
    A hole opener is run either with a pilot bit or with a bull nose which guides the hole opener along
      the pilot hole. There is thus no need to steer a hole opener and no risk to drill away from the pilot


                                   Page 5 of 28                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 164 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

       hole. The bull nose can be fitted directly to the hole opener or one joint below to give more
         flexibility.

     As an alternative to a hole opener, especially in hole sizes less than 17½”, a “common” bit may
     be used to enlarge the hole. This is not recommended in soft formation In harder formations the
        bit is more likely to follow the path of least resistance but  it is necessary to measure the
      deviation of the well at frequent intervals to check that  it is following the trajectory of the pilot
       hole.

     The majority of hole openers  still use roller cones, with either steel teeth or tungsten carbide
       inserts depending on the formation. These are available from 8 3/8” (6” pilot hole) to 48” (17 ½”
        pilot hole). The number of cones (from 3 to 8) is a function of the size of the hole.
      Fixed blade hole openers are available for smaller (less than 17½”) hole sections. They remove
      the risk of cones falling off and can cut in an upward direction as well should this become
      necessary (“squeezing formation”).

      While using a hole opener:

      •      Cutter selection will depend on the formation based on the same consideration as for bits
      •      Soft Formations will normally respond better to higher RPM and lower WOB, while hard
             formation require higher WOB and less RPM.
      •          If fractured formations are encountered, adjust drilling parameter to avoid bouncing
      •     Use sufficient flowrate to obtain a good hole cleaning
      •     Always stabilise the lower end of the hole opener to prevent it from rotating off centre. A
             rock bit (i.e. if is not anticipated to be clean) or a bullnose half an inch to an inch smaller
             than the pilot hole should be efficient.

2.7.2 Under-Reamers
      Typical applications include:

      •  Opening the hole below a casing shoe, to provide a larger annular space for cementing the
          next casing string. This permits for example, the use of a larger intermediate casing string
          diameter than could be used otherwise.
      •  Overcome BOP or wellhead size diameter restriction.
      •   Enlarging the hole annulus within the producing zone for gravel pack completion.
      •  Opening a pocket to start a sidetrack.
      •   Reducing dog leg severity
      •   Enlarging “heaving areas” through problem fault zone.

      Since the underreamer has to pass through a restricted bore, it incorporates expandable cutters
      which stay collapsed when the tool is RIH. The cutters are then expanded into the formation by
        utilising the differential pressure of the drilling fluid. Once the hole is undereamed to the desire
      depth, the pumps are turned off, allowing the arms to collapse back into the body for POOH.

     Under reamers used to have rolling cones on extending arms, but nowadays, the tendency is to
     use extending arms fitted with PDC cutters. They can be run with a bullnose or a small drilling bit
     as for hole openers.

      Should limited oversize be required, an alternative would be a bi-centered bit (e.g. 8 1/2” X 9
       7/8”) which eliminates the risks associated with under-reamer.

3.0  Drill String Design

3.1  Objectives
     The objective of drill string design is to:

      •   Ensure that the maximum stress at any point in the drill string is less than the down-rated
            yield strength


                                   Page 6 of 28                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 165 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      •   Ensure that the components and configuration of the  drill string minimise the effects of
           fatigue
      •   Provide equipment that is resistant to H2S, if H2S is anticipated.

3.2  Assumptions
     The following assumptions are made:

      •   In low angled holes, tension  is approximated using the “buoyed weight” method. This
          ignores the effects of circulating pressure and hole angle on tension. Although not as exact
         as the “pressure – area” method, any errors are compensated  for by selecting an
          appropriate margin of overpull. ERD and horizontal wells require computer modelling to
          evaluate torque and drag effects.
      •   In vertical holes, buckling is assumed to occur up to the point in the string where buoyed
           string weight equals weight on bit. This is incorrectly termed “neutral point in tension”. In
           practice,  if pressure-area forces are considered, the actual neutral point will always occur
         below this point unless either the drill pipe becomes stuck or bit pressure drop is increased
           with the bit on bottom.
      •   In inclined holes, buckling is assumed to occur when the compressive load in a component
         exceeds the component’s critical buckling load.
      •  The tension calculations in the vertical and low angle holes assume a vertical hanging string
              i.e. a worst case with no hole support.  If the hole is not vertical, then the design is a
          conservative one which is meant to offset the higher tensile drag as the hole angle and step
          out increase.
      •   In the ERD designs, tensile drag is ignored for calculations in rotary drilling mode. Errors are
          small  unless  rotating  very  slowly  with  high  penetration  rates. Under normal  drilling
           conditions, rotating speed will exceed axial speed.
      •    Drill string torsional load capacity is fixed at tool joint make-up torque.
      •   Material yield strength for all components is the specified minimum for the component being
          considered.
      •    Drill pipe tube wall thickness is the minimum for the stated drill pipe weight and class.
      •   Connection torsional strength and make-up torque are calculated using the A.P.Farr formula
         from API RP 7G.

3.3  Design Factors
      Design factors are used to down rate the load capacities of components to provide additional
      margin for error caused by differences between the assumptions made in design and the real
      world.

     Tension (DFT)
      This is used to reduce the drill pipe tensile capacity to establish the maximum allowable tensile
       load. DFT is typically 1.15

     Margin of Overpull (MOP)
     The  desired excess  tension above  the normal hanging   / working  load  to account  for
      contingencies such as hole drag, stuck pipe etc. May be any positive amount but typically
      specified from 50,000 to 150,000 lbs depending on hole conditions.

     Excess BHA Weight (DFBHA)
      Defines the amount of BHA weight in excess of bit weight that a given BHA will contain. This
     excess weight provides an extra margin to keep the neutral point below the top of the BHA.
     Recommended DFBHA is 1.15

     Torsion
      Applied torsion is limited to tool joint make-up torque. Standard make-up torque is 60% of tool
        joint torsional yield strength and standard tool joints are weaker in torsion than the tubes to
      which they are attached. Therefore, a design factor is not required.

     Collapse pressure (DFC)


                                   Page 7 of 28                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 166 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      Collapse pressure capacities are first down rated to account for the effect of any tension and
      then further down rated by dividing by the collapse design factor. The DFC is typically 1.1 to 1.15.

     Burst pressure (DFBP)
      This is used to reduce a component’s burst pressure capacity to give a maximum permissible
      burst pressure that can be applied. Burst capacity is increased when tension is applied but this is
      normally ignored.

     Buckling (DFB)
      This is the high angle well safety factor equivalent to the excess BHA factor for vertical wells.
      Both serve to prevent  drill pipe from buckling in rotary mode. The difference is that DFBHA
      increases BHA length in vertical wells while DFB decreases allowable bit weight in ERD and
       horizontal wells where the traditional BHA is absent.

4.0  Design for Vertical to Moderate Angle Wellbores

4.1  Design Stages
     Working from the bit to surface:

      •  Choose drill collar size, connection and connection features.
      •   Determine torsional strength of drill collar connections.
      •   Determine minimum lengths of drill collar and HWDP sections.
      •  Check slip-crushing forces.
      •   Set design factors and margin of overpull in tension.
      •   Calculate allowable and working tension loads
      •   Calculate maximum permissible length of each drill pipe section
      •   Calculate de-rated collapse pressure capacities of drill pipe tubes under tensile loading.

4.2  Drill Collar Size
      •   Unless mechanical hole sticking is a problem, the largest diameter BHA consistent with
          other needs should be used.
      •  The increased stiffness translates into better directional control.
      •   Presence of collars means fewer connections for a specified weight on bit.
      •   Larger collars means reduced BHA length and hence reduced differential sticking risk.
      •   Larger collars have less lateral freedom of movement. This reduces the magnitude of the
            cyclic stresses generated by buckling and lateral vibration and thus increases connection
           fatigue life.
      •   Other considerations include:
          •    ability to fish
          •   effective range of pipe handling equipment
          •   directional control requirements
          •   hydraulics
          •   desired features (spiral grooves, elevator groove etc)

4.3 BHA Connections / Features
     The following points are applicable to all BHA components including crossovers, stabilisers,
      motors, LWD and MWD tools, hole openers, under-reamers, jars etc.

4.3.1 Bending Strength Ratio (BSR)
      This is the ratio of the relative stiffness of the box to the pin for a given connection.

      High BSR’s can cause accelerated pin failure.
     Low BSR’s can cause box failures.

       Field experience suggests that larger OD collars suffer predominantly from box fatigue cracks
     even when at or near the optimum BSR of 2.5. This suggests that higher BSR’s might be a more

                                   Page 8 of 28                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 167 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      appropriate guideline for large OD collars. Conversely, 4¾” collars with BSR’s of 1.8 are rarely
      found to exhibit box fatigue cracks. This serves to highlight the importance of field experience
     when choosing BSR’s for particular collar sizes.

     The recommended BSR for typical drill collar sizes is shown in the table below. These numbers
      should be adjusted as determined by local operating conditions.

                          Recommended BSR ranges
               Drill Collar OD           Traditional BSR range     Recommended BSR range
             < 6”                   2.25 – 2.75                     1.8 – 2.5
              6” – 7 7/8”                2.25 – 2.75                   2.25 – 2.75
           = or > 8”                 2.25 – 2.75                     2.5 – 3.2

      Transitions between sections of different stiffness act as stress concentrators. This problem is
     worsened by short, straight crossovers. If a straight (non-bottleneck) crossover is used and its
    OD is larger than the HWDP tool joint OD, the resulting BSR of the upper crossover connection
    may be very high, resulting in accelerated pin fatigue. Bottleneck subs alleviate this problem by
      providing a smooth change in cross section.

     The equations used in the calculation of BSR are given in Appendix 1.

4.3.2 BHA Connection Thread Form
     Thread forms with full root radii should be used in all BHA connections to maximise fatigue
      resistance. API regular, NC and Full Hole connections all meet this requirement although the
     API NC thread form (V-038R) is superior to the others. The H-90 thread form is also considered
      acceptable even though it does not have a full root radius.

        All connections that employ a “standard” V-065 thread form, except PAC, are obsolete. The
     “NC” thread form should be specified instead of the obsolete “IF” or “XH” names as this will
      eliminate the possibility of receiving the fatigue prone V-065 thread form.

4.3.3 Stress Relief Features
      Stress relief features should be specified on all BHA connections NC-38 and larger. These
      features include the “stress relieved pin” and “bore-back box”. Both extend connection fatigue
         life by eliminating disengaged thread roots, which act as stress concentrators. Stress relief
      features  are  beneficial on   all HWDP  connections.  Pin  stress  relief  grooves  are  not
     recommended for connections smaller than NC-38 because they may weaken the connection’s
       tensile and torsional strength and because fatigue is often less of a problem than non-cyclic
      loads on small connections. Bore-back could be used on smaller connections without weakening
     them and should be considered if box fatigue is occurring.

4.3.4 Cold Rolling
      Cold rolling BHA (and HWDP) thread roots and stress relief surfaces increases fatigue life by
      placing a residual compressive stress in the thread roots. Not beneficial on normal weight drill
      pipe where fatigue is rarely a problem due to the relative stiffness of the tool joint compared to
      the tube.

4.3.5 BHA Connection Torsional Strength
      Since torsion is transmitted from the top down, BHA connections are usually subjected to lower
       torsional loads than the connections above. However,  if "stick / slip" is occurring or a tapered
     assembly is being used, torsional strength should be checked to confirm that it is greater than
      the torsion expected within the operating BHA. Tool joint torsional strength tables cannot be
     used directly for this purpose because tool joint and drill collar materials have different yield
      strengths. Drill collar connection torsional strength can be calculated as follows:





                                   Page 9 of 28                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 168 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      MUT
     TS =
                    f

     where   TS        - DC connection torsional strength (ft lbs)
          MUT     - DC make-up torque (ft lbs)
                          f          - factor from table below

                    Factors for converting drill collar MUT to Torsional Strength
         Connection Type       OD < or = 6-7/8”           OD > 6-7/8”
           PAC                                  f = 0.795                         n/a
             H-90                                  f = 0.511                                     f = 0.562
              Other                                  f = 0.568                                     f = 0.625

4.4  Stabiliser and Jar Placement

4.4.1 Stabilisers
     The number, size and position of stabilisers is often determined by directional considerations.
     However, they also have an impact on other design aspects.

       1.  While rotary drilling vertical wells, the lower part of the BHA will suffer buckling and be
         supported by the sides of the hole. Stabilisers reduce connection stress/ increase fatigue life
         by restricting the freedom of lateral drill collar movement.
       2.   If mechanical sticking is a concern, more or larger stabilisers may increase the likelihood of
           getting stuck. Conversely, when differential sticking is a concern, the presence of stabilisers
         can reduce this risk by keeping the collars off the sides of the wellbore.

4.4.2 Jars
      Jar placement is dictated by the need to have maximum impact should the BHA become stuck
      while attempting to ensure that fatigue failure does not occur. Until recently, the rule of thumb
     was to run the jars in tension. More recently, in high angle wells, it has become acceptable to
      run jars in compression. This has led to confusion regarding placement of jars i.e. whether to run
       in tension or compression and whether buckled or not buckled. (Note: A rotating, buckled drill
       string element is always a concern in drilling and should be avoided).

     To clarify matters, the following rule is advocated:

                  “Do not run the jars buckled at any time”.

      This rule obviously precludes jars from being run in mechanical compression in vertical hole
      sections. However, in high angle wells,  it recognises that a jar can be subjected to a large
      compressive load without buckling.

4.5  Length of BHA section
     The length of drill collar section will depend on the type of BHA being designed and whether or
      not HWDP are to be used for bit weight. Three types of BHA design are considered as illustrated
       in fig 1 below

      •  Type A  : Full bit weight is supplied by drill collars. The HWDP are present to span the
           transition from DC’s to DP.
      •  Type B : Sufficient DC’s are used to achieve either directional control or other objectives
         except WOB. Bit weight derives from both DC’s and HWDP. This BHA is easier to handle on
          the rig floor and appears to have reduced the incidence of drill collar failure.
      •  Type C : More than one size of drill collar is used but bit weight is still provided by both DC’s
        and HWDP. As with Type B, the number of DC’s  is influenced by directional or other
           objectives (not WOB).




                                   Page 10 of 28                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 169 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE





                                                      Drill
                                      Pipe




                                                                HWDP for
                                                                                                                         transition and
                          HWDP for                               WOB
                                                 transition only

                                                                        Neutral                            Neutral
                                                                         Point                              Point


                                           HWDP for
                                                                                 transition and
                                         WOB
                                              Neutral                                                Tapered Drill
                                              Point                                                             Collar String


                                                             Drill
                                                Collars





                            Type A                   Type B                         Type C

                                 Figure 1.0 - Three BHA Configurations

4.5.1 Type A BHA
     The minimum length of drill collars is calculated as follows:

       WOB × DFBHA    L DC =
     W DC × K B × cosθ

     Where   LDC    = Minimum drill collar length (ft)
         WOB  = Maximum weight on bit (lbs)
             DFBHA  = Design factor for excess weight
             KB     = Buoyancy factor
              θ     = Maximum hole angle at BHA (degrees)
           WDC   = Air weight of drill collars (lbs/ft)

     The design factor for excess BHA weight is chosen to ensure that the neutral point remains
     below the top of the BHA. This factor is typically assigned a value of 1.15 for most applications
      although hard drilling conditions may warrant a higher value. The minimum length of collars is
      often rounded up to the next stand of collars.

     The amount of HWDP for transition should be determined by past experience and typically
     would be of the order 9 – 30 joints.

4.5.2 Type B and C BHAs
     The amount of HWDP required to apply the necessary bit weight and keep the neutral point
       within the BHA can be determined using the following formula:

                 WOB × DFBHA                                                                       - (W DC1 × L DC1 ) - (W DC2 × L DC2 )                                 K B × cosθ                                                                         L HWDP =
               W HWDP

                                   Page 11 of 28                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 170 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


     Where  LHWDP  = Minimum HWDP length (ft)
         WOB  = Maximum weight on bit (lbs)
             DFBHA  = Design factor for excess weight
             KB     = Buoyancy factor
              θ     = Maximum hole angle at BHA (degrees)
            WDC1  = Air weight of drill collars in first section (lbs/ft)
               LDC1   = Length of first section of collars (ft)
            WDC2  = Air weight of drill collars in second section (lbs/ft)
               LDC2   = Length of second section of collars (ft)
            WHWDP = Air weight of HWDP (lbs/ft)

     As hole angle increases, a point will be reached where a heavy BHA would be more detrimental
     due to increased tensile and torsional drag than  it would be beneficial for providing bit weight.
     The above two formulae will then cease to apply beyond that point i.e. for higher hole angles.

      For these higher hole angles,  it is accepted practice to apply bit weight via normal weight drill
      pipe run in mechanical compression.

4.6  Tool Joint Torsional Capacity
     To prevent down-hole make-up and torsional failure, maximum operating torque should never
     exceed tool joint make-up torque.

      Actual tool joint torque should be based on the actual OD and ID of the connection being used,
       rather than a general make up torque for a given connection type.

    When a high operating torque is expected, make-up torque can be increased, but the effect of a
      possible reduction in the tensile capacity of the tool joint needs to be determined. This will be
      discussed in more detail in section X.Y.

      Connection dimensions and torque gauge accuracy should always be checked irrespective of
      whether high operating torque is expected.

     The equations used in the calculation of tool joint make up torque are given in Appendix 1.

4.7  Stiffness Ratio
     The Stiffness Ratio (SR) of the sections above and below each transition must be compared to
      help in quantifying the abruptness of the section change and determine the need for transition
       pipe. This is achieved by dividing the Section Modulus (Z) of the lower section by the Section
     Modulus of the upper section.

        Z Lower    SR =
        Z Upper

    π OD 4 - ID 4    Z =   ×
        64   OD

     As with BSR, the Stiffness Ratio is not a strictly quantitative performance limit and experience
      should be used to determine the optimum SR. If drill pipe failures are being experienced at the
      top of a BHA despite adequate drill collar weight for WOB, then transition pipe may be needed.
     The following guidelines have been found to be generally acceptable:

       1.  For routine drilling or very low failure rate experience, keep the SR below 5.5
       2.  For severe drilling of for significant failure rate experience, keep the SR below 3.5





                                   Page 12 of 28                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 171 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

4.8  Drill Pipe Tensile Design
     The basis for selecting various pipe grades to make up a drill string is to always maintain the
      desired margin of overpull (MOP) at all points in the string. This is accomplished by adding the
      lowest pipe grade, one joint at a time, starting from the top of the BHA upwards. Each joint must
      support the BHA weight plus the  drill pipe below that joint. When the working load (PW) is
      reached for that grade of  drill pipe, the next higher grade should be used and the process
      repeated until the drill string is complete.

      Note: The nominal weight of drill pipe is merely a descriptive term for identification purposes and
       refers to the line pipe. The actual weight (air weight or adjusted weight) which includes the tool
        joint weights should always be used in these calculations.


                     5-inch 19.50 lb/ft grade E, Premium Class DP
                  (assume:DFT = 1.15, MOP = 100,000 lbs)

            TENSILE LOAD CAPACITY (PT)


                                  (From DS-1™, Table 2.5)


          ALLOWABLE LOAD (PA)




                                           DFT
          WORKING LOAD (PW)
                           MOP


                                                    170.1         270.1          311.5
                          TENSILE LOAD (1000's lbs)


               Figure 2: Tensile Design Nomenclature

4.8.1 Determine Tensile Load Capacity (PT)
      This is the calculated tensile pull to yield the pipe body. Values from tables, allowing for derating
     based on wall thickness / class of pipe.

4.8.2 Determine Design Factor in Tension (DFT)
     The factor used to de-rate the tensile load capacity to obtain the allowable load (PA). Typically, a
     DFT of 1.1 is used.

4.8.3 Calculate Allowable Load (PA)
     The maximum load placed on a pipe including contingency.
     PA = PT / DFT

4.8.4 Set Margin of Overpull (MOP)
     The design excess pull capacity above the working load (PW) to compensate for expected drag,
      possible sticking, slip crushing and the effect of circulating pressure.
    MOP values typically 50,000 – 150,000lbs

4.8.5 Calculate Working Load (PW)
     Working load is the maximum expected tension that will occur during normal operations.


                                   Page 13 of 28                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 172 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

    PW = PA – MOP

4.8.6 Calculate the Maximum Length of the First Drill Pipe Section
     The maximum length of the lowest acceptable grade of drill pipe, in the first DP section above
      the BHA, can be determined using the following formula

        PW1                      - (WDC1 × L DC1 ) - ( WDC2 × L DC2 ) - ( WHWDP × L HWDP )
        K B    L DP1 =
                 W1

     Where   LDP1   = Maximum length of drill pipe in section 1 (ft)
             PW1    = Working load of drill pipe in section 1 (lbs)
              LHWDP  = Length of HWDP length (ft)
             KB     = Buoyancy factor
            WDC1  = Air weight of drill collars in first section (lbs/ft)
               LDC1   = Length of first section of collars (ft)
            WDC2  = Air weight of drill collars in second section (lbs/ft)
               LDC2   = Length of second section of collars (ft)
            WHWDP = Air weight of HWDP (lbs/ft)
          W1    = Air weight of drill pipe in section 1 (lbs/ft)

4.8.7 Calculate the Maximum Length of the Second Drill Pipe Section
     To calculate the amount of drill pipe in the second section above the BHA (if required):

          PW2 - PW1      LDP 2 =
       W 2 × K B

     Where   LDP2   = Length of drill pipe in section 2 (ft)
             PW2    = Working load of drill pipe in section 2 (lbs)
             PW1    = Working load of drill pipe in section 1 (lbs)
          W2    = Air weight of drill pipe in section 2 (lbs/ft)
             KB     = Buoyancy factor

4.8.8 Calculate the Maximum Length of the Third Drill Pipe Section
     To calculate the amount of drill pipe in the third section above the BHA (if required):

        PW3 - PW2    L DP 3 =
      W 3 × K B

     Where   LDP3   = Length of drill pipe in section 3 (ft)
             PW3    = Working load of drill pipe in section 3 (lbs)
             PW2    = Working load of drill pipe in section 2 (lbs)
          W3    = Air weight of drill pipe in section 3 (lbs/ft)
             KB     = Buoyancy factor

4.9  Burst Pressure
       In general, drill pipe is not used in applications requiring high burst pressure loading if gas is the
      source of the pressure. Tubing with premium connections is often better suited.

        Drill pipe should never be used to carry gas containing hydrogen sulphide at a partial pressure
      greater than 0.05psia. Burst ratings can be found tabulated and assume minimum material
      properties and no axial load. While simultaneous tensile loading will increase burst pressure
       capacity, this is usually ignored and retained as an additional safety factor.



                                   Page 14 of 28                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 173 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

4.10 Collapse Pressure
     The collapse pressure acting at any point within the drill string under static conditions is:

     PC = PA – PDP + D(GA – GDP)

     Where  PC    = Collapse pressure on drill pipe (psi)
             PA     = Surface annulus pressure (psi)
              PDP    = Surface drill pipe pressure (psi)
          D     = Depth of interest (ft)
            GA    = Fluid gradient in annulus (psi/ft)
             GDP   = Fluid gradient in drill pipe (psi/ft)

      Note: Simultaneous tension and annulus pressure will reduce collapse capacity which should be
      de-rated as below if tensile loads are anticipated.

4.11 Combined Loading
     These cases refer to situations where there are several loads being exerted on a tubular at the
     same time.

       1.   Simultaneous tension reduces drill pipe collapse capacity and vice versa.
       2.   Simultaneous torsion reduces drill pipe tensile capacity and vice versa.
       3.   Connection make-up (torque) beyond a given point reduces connection tensile capacity.
       4.   Simultaneous tension reduces the torsional yield strength of pin-weak connections.

4.11.1 De-rating Collapse Pressure Capacity of Drill Pipe under Tension
     The de-rating factor for the collapse capacity of pipe under tension can be calculated from
      equations given in API RP7G Appendix A. However, a quicker method is to use the following
      graph (also from API RP7G). The equations use an average Yield Strength whilst the graphical
     method uses the minimum Yield Strength.





                                   Page 15 of 28                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 174 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
               DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


                               Yield Strengths
      Pipe Grade          Minimum Yield      Average Yield Strength
                              Strength (psi)                   (psi)
        E                   75,000                85,000
        X                   95,000                110,000
       G                  105,000               120,000
        S                  135,000               145,000




                                                                                             0

                  AXIAL STRESS

       COMPRESSION        TENSION
       & BURST            & BURST

                                                                                            20
             STRESS
         HOOP                                                                                    40              Resistance

                         TENSION &       COMPRESSION      COLLAPSE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Collapse
       & COLLAPSE         (ENLARGED)
                                                                                          60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Normal
                                                                                                of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Percent
                                                                                          80





                                                                                           100

0                20                40                60                80                100
                          Axial Tension - Percent of "Average" Yield Strength


 Fig 3 - Ellipse of Biaxial Yield Stress

Example
Determine the collapse pressure capacity of 5”, 19.5lb/ft grade E pipe under a tensile load of
50,000 lbs.

1.  From drill pipe tables, tensile capacity for this pipe is 311,535lbs and collapse capacity is
     7041psi.
2.   Express the axial load as a percentage of the minimum Yield Strength.
  % Min YS   = (Axial load) x (100) / PT
              = (50,000 x 100) / (311,535)
              = 16%
3.   Plot 16% on horizontal axis of Fig 3. Take a perpendicular up to curve and then horizontal
    from curve to intersect y axis at 90% (a de-rating factor of 0.9).
4.   Multiply the nominal collapse capacity by the de-rating factor.
    = 7041 x 0.9
    = 6337 psi
5.  Assuming a design factor for collapse (DFC) of 1.125, de-rated collapse capacity
    = 6337 / 1.125
    = 5632 psi





                             Page 16 of 28                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 175 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

4.11.2 De-rate Drill Pipe Tensile Load Capacity under Combined Torsion and
    Tension
      This situation could occur when back-reaming, pulling on stuck pipe or fishing. By inserting the
      applied tensile or torque load into the following equation, the maximum torque or tensile load
      respectively that can be applied simultaneously can be calculated.

         0.096167 × J        2  P 2
   Q T =            x Ym -   2         OD         A

     Where  QT    = minimum torsional yield under tension, lb-ft
              J     = polar moment of inertia
                   = (π/32)(OD4 – ID4) for tubes
          OD    = outside diameter, ins
              ID    = inside diameter, ins
            Ym    = minimum unit yield strength, psi
           P     = total load in tension, lbs
           A     = cross section area
                   = (π/4)(OD2 – ID2)

     Example
     What is the maximum torque that can be applied to stuck pipe under a tensile load as follows:
     3½” OD 13.3 lb/ft Grade E drill pipe (new)
      Tensile load 100,000 lbs

      ID (from tables) = 2.764”
     Ym = 75,000 psi

      J = (π/32)(3.54 – 2.7644) = 9
    A = (π/4)(3.52 – 2.7642) = 3.6209in2

         0.096167 × 9           100,000 2
   Q T =            x  75,000 -           2               3.5                3.6209

     QT = 17,243 lb-ft

4.11.3 Tool Joint Tensile Load Capacity at Applied Make-up Torque
     Make-up torque should not exceed the recommended value unless the impact of the excess
      torque on the tensile capacity of the string is first considered.

     The tensile capacity of tubes is normally significantly lower than the tensile capacity of the tool
       joints and so it is commonly assumed that a string’s tensile capacity is limited by the tube.
      Increased make-up torque places stress on the pin neck which is additive to the tensile load in
      the string at each tool joint. Thus, a point will be reached at which the pin neck becomes the
     weakest part in the string.


      For a particular tool joint it is possible to construct a tool joint combined loading curve, similar to
       that shown in Figure 4. The points P1, T1, T2, T3 and T4 can all be derived from equations in
     API RP7G Appendix A.8.3.





                                   Page 17 of 28                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 176 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE





                                                  Pin Yield Region



                    P1                                T4    T3
                                                                                   Box and Pin                                                             Tension                                                                                                          Yield Region
                            Shoulder
                                                             Applied      Separation
                          Region




                                                           Operating Region





                                                                               Box Yield
                                                                                      Region


                                                Make up Torque            T1             T2


                      Fig 4 Combined Load Curve for Tool Joints

      Using these curves it is possible to determine the effect on increasing the make up torque on the
      allowable tensile capacity of the tool joint. It is then necessary to determine if the tool joint or the
         drill pipe tube is then the weaker part of the drill string.

4.12 Stability Forces and Drill Pipe Buckling
      Usually, full circulation is established while off bottom thereby preventing any temporary build-up
       of pressure in the drill string. However, if bit pressure drop is increased while on bottom, the drill
      pipe can buckle above the BHA (fatigue damage) even though the neutral point is within the
     BHA. This occurs because the drill pipe is unable to stretch to compensate for the increase in
       internal pressure. However, any buckling that does occur is purely temporary and will be lost
     once sufficient new hole has been drilled to allow the pipe to stretch.

     Whether or not  drill pipe buckling occurs will depend on the conditions at the time. Typical
      conditions would include:

      •   Shallow drilling
      •   Thin-walled drill pipe in use
      •   Large changes in bit pressure drop
      •   High WOB for available BHA weight.

     Adherence to the following rule should help to avoid this situation occurring:

     Any time an increase in pump rate occurs while the bit is on bottom, pick up the drill
      string until a gain in weight is first noticeable. This will allow the string to stretch and
      relieve the tendency to buckle.

4.13 Slip Crushing
       Slips exert hoop compression on drill pipe and can deform  it under certain conditions. A unit
       tensile stress (St) from hanging weight will result in a hoop stress (Sh) that is a function of many
       factors such as slip length, coefficient of friction between slips and bowl, pipe diameter etc. Slip-
      crushing constants (Sh/St) have been calculated for varying conditions all of which assume a
       coefficient of friction between slip and bowl of 0.08.





                                   Page 18 of 28                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 177 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


                                          Slip Crushing Constants (Sh/St)
                Pipe Size                                      Slip Length (ins)
                       (ins)                       12                        16

                   2-3/8                         1.25                         1.18
                   2-7/8                         1.31                         1.22
                   3-1/2                         1.39                         1.28
                 4                           1.45                         1.32
                   4-1/2                         1.52                         1.37
                 5                           1.59                         1.42
                   5-1/2                         1.66                         1.47
                   6-5/8                         1.82                         1.59

     Assuming that the pipe is not stuck, the maximum tension carried by the slips  will be the
     Working Load (PW). To ensure that there is sufficient margin to allow for slip crushing, the
       following conditions must be obeyed:

    PW x (Sh/St) < or = PA

     Where  PW    = Working Load, lbs
             PA    = Maximum allowable load, lbs
                 Sh/St   = Slip crushing constant

      Note:  If the pipe is stuck and  it is necessary to set the slips with additional tension, then the
     above calculation should include the extra string tension.

          If the margin of overpull (MOP) is chosen to ensure that it always complies with the relationship
      below, then the slip crushing effect will always be catered for.

    MOP > or = PW x ((Sh/St) – 1)

     The above assumes that the slips, slip element and bowl are in good order and are regularly
      inspected.

4.14 Welded components
     Welded components should be avoided. Most components are made from relatively high carbon
       steels which are heat treated to achieve the required properties. Welding permanently alters
      these  properties and, unless heat  treated  again, the component  will be weakened and
       embrittled.

5.0  Design for Extended Reach Wellbores

5.1  General Design Considerations
       In high angle wells, traditional BHA components are often eliminated and bit weight is more likely
       to be applied by running normal weight drill pipe in compression (never considered in vertical
       wells).

      For a given measured depth, surface tension load from hanging weight  will decrease with
      increasing well angle due to increasing wall support. However, torque and drag will increase as
      hole angle increases. The load  limit  will more  likely be  its torsional capacity under these
      circumstances.

       In vertical wells, frictional forces are either ignored or taken account of by utilising design factors
      or margin of overpull. Highly deviated wells need to be able to account for frictional forces.
      Generally, this is an iterative process and is most efficiently tackled using computer simulation
      techniques as depicted in Figure 5.



                                   Page 19 of 28                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 178 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE





                               Economic Issues     Component availability
                                                               Logistics
                                                     Cost

                                 Hole Issues          Hole Cleaning
                                                     Hole Stability
                                                             Hydraulics, ECD
                                                    Casing Wear
                                                                Directional Objectives

                                 Rig Issues           Storage Space
                                                     Setback Space
                                                     Accuracy of Load
                                       Indicators
                                          Pump Pressure/Volume
                                                        Capacity
                                               To pDive Output Torque



                               SELECT THE
                                    DRILL STRING
                            COMPONENTS


                                          ITERATE


                             DETERMINE THE
                             EXPECTED LOADS


                                Figure 5: Designing a drillstring for ER drilling
                        may involve many considerations

      Figure 5 outlines most of the design considerations for deviated wellbores but the single most
      important aspect will be availability. Can the well be drilled with the pipe that is on the selected
       rig? If so, this will inevitably be the most economical option.

5.2  Estimating Drill String Loads
     Hand calculating torque and drag is possible but not practical bearing in mind the large number
       of calculations required. A computer program can complete the necessary iterations faster and
     more efficiently.

     Most of these programmes are based on the model by Johancik which analyses the drill string
       tensile and torsional loads in discrete sections and then sums the results over the entire hole.

5.3  Drag Coefficient
     Torque and drag programmes use an assumed friction coefficient which is initially based on
      area experience using whatever the proposed fluid system will be. Once drilling commences, the
     programmes can be calibrated against actual loads to refine the model. However, torque and
      drag loads derive, not only from friction, but also from the effects of hole tortuosity, cuttings
       build-up, swelling shale, differential sticking etc. The friction coefficient would thus be more
      appropriately termed a drag coefficient. This coefficient will vary as both rotational and axial
     movement varies and as the direction of movement changes as well.

5.4  Critical Hole Angle
     As hole angle increases, the BHA is less likely to slide down under its own weight. At the point at
      which it must be pushed to gain further advance, the wellbore angle is termed the critical angle.


                                   Page 20 of 28                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 179 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


          θcrit = Arctan (1/f)

     Where     θcrit    = Critical angle
                          f      = Coefficient of hole drag.

      This is normally in the order of 70 – 80 degrees, depending upon the actual coefficient of drag.
5.5  Torsion
      Tool joints are weaker than the tubes under torsion and the torsion capacity of a tool joint is
      taken to be its make-up torque. If predicted surface torque is likely to exceed make-up torque,
      then the string is torsion capacity limited and the following measures should be considered:

      •   The diameter and weight of  drill string components in high angle sections should be
          minimised. This reduces the operating torque but must be balanced against the need to
          reduce internal pressure losses and maintain the stability of normal weight drill pipe.
      •   The make-up torque on the existing drill pipe can be increased as long as the tool joints are
           not over-stressed and the pin neck tensile capacity is not reduced below that required by
           the operation.
      •   The drill pipe on the rig may be changed out for pipe with higher torsional capacity tool
             joints. This may be pipe with standard sized tool joints that have higher OD’s and smaller
            ID’s if the hydraulics model permits.
      •   The operating torque can be reduced by mud selection, mud additives or through the use of
           torque reducing equipment e.g. torque reducing subs.

5.6 Non Standard Joints
    New and premium class tool joints are designed to be about 80% as strong in torsion as the
      tubes to which they are welded. Non standard tool joints do exist for various reasons making it
       essential that all tool joints are measured to confirm actual dimensions. Non standard joints are
      acceptable but will have different make-up torque values.

5.7  Factors Affecting Torsion Capacity
        All API tool joints are made from material having a minimum yield strength of 120,000psi, tool
        joint torsional capacity is determined only by connection type, pin ID and box OD. The following
       table illustrates the impact of tool joint dimensions for 5” 19.5ppf, S grade drillpipe along with the
     make-up torques assuming standard thread dope (friction factor = 1.0).

                       Properties of New Standard Sized Tool Joints on 5” 19.5ppf Drillpipe
               Grade               ID (ins)          OD (ins)            Make-up
                                                                                  torque (ft-lb)
              E                    3-3/4                  6-5/8                22,840
              X                    3-1/2                  6-5/8                27,080
            G                    3-1/4                  6-5/8                31,020
              S                    2-3/4                  6-5/8                38,040

5.8  Fatigue in ERD Wells
     The prime cause of fatigue in high angle wells:

       1.   Drill pipe buckling
       2.   Drill collar sag

      Preventing buckling while rotating normal weight drill pipe and jars operating under mechanical
      compression will be a concern. Because of the high angle,  it is often necessary to apply bit
      weight both with and through normal weight drill pipe in mechanical compression. As long as no
      buckling occurs, fatigue damage should be avoided. When sliding but not rotating, any buckling
       that occurs should not prompt fatigue damage. However, once rotation  is applied, fatigue
      through buckling becomes an issue.


                                   Page 21 of 28                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 180 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

        Drill collar sag relates to the low side sagging tendency of the BHA and its accompanying cyclic
       stress.

5.8.1 Drill Pipe Buckling
      Buckling  drill pipe while rotating can cause rapid fatigue failure. In high angle wells,  it  is
      necessary to run drill pipe in mechanical compression to be able to apply bit weight. However, if
      the magnitude of mechanical compression does not exceed the critical buckling load, then the
      pipe will suffer little damage.

     The maximum mechanical compression in a vertical string must remain below critical buckling
      load to ensure no fatigue damage.

       In a deviated wellbore, the critical buckling load will be higher than for a vertical section due to
      the support provided by the inclined wellbore itself. The limiting factor will be the buckling load in
      the vertical sections measured as above. The problem is though determining where and at what
        bit weight buckling will commence. If the bit weight required to promote the onset of buckling can
     be determined, then, assuming that the well can be drilled with a lower bit weight, the buckling
       risk can be diminished.

      Buckling initiation points are:

       1.  Lowermost joint in a tangent section
       2.  In the straight hole section immediately at or above the kick-off point.
       3.  Over the entire length of a horizontal tangent section (initiated just below tangent section).

6.0  Fatigue
      •    Fatigue  is the progressive localised permanent structural damage that occurs when a
           material undergoes repeated stress cycles.
      •    Fatigue damage accumulates at high stress points and ultimately a fatigue crack forms.
           This can grow under continued cyclic loading until failure occurs.
      •   For a given material, the severity of fatigue attack  is greater at higher  cyclic stress
          amplitude and at higher average tensile stress.
      •    Failure will occur at points of highest stress on any component and so failures are almost
          always near some stress concentrator such as a notch, pit, section change or thread root.

6.1  Sources of Fatigue-Inducing Cyclic Stresses
      •   Rotating the string while part of it is bent or buckled.
      •   Vibration

6.2  Mitigation
      Actions that will minimise the occurrence of damaging cyclic stresses.

      •      Configure the bottom-hole assemblies and limit bit weight so that simultaneous rotation
           and buckling does not occur in normal weight drill pipe or jars.
      •      Select products and components and configure string sections with smooth geometric
               transitions (sharp section changes magnify stress and accelerate fatigue).
      •     Reduce the degree of drill pipe bending (dogleg) and the degree of BHA bending and
             buckling to the lowest levels consistent with other objectives.
      •      Monitor and reduce vibration.

6.3  Critical Rotary Speeds
      At certain speeds, defined as critical, the drill pipe experiences vibrations which can cause wear
     and deformation of the pipe body and lead to failure due to metal fatigue.





                                   Page 22 of 28                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 181 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

       Critical speeds depends on the length and size of the drill pipe, drill collars and hole size. A
      warning indication that the drill string may be working within the critical range of speed are high
      torque and eventually vibration at the rotary table.

     To extend the life of the drilling equipment, RPM must be selected and monitored in order to
      avoid critical rotary speeds while drilling. Downhole vibration subs (MWD) or drillstring vibration
      surface measurement techniques can be used.

6.4  Corrosion in Water Based Drilling Fluid
       In water based  drilling  fluids, metallic corrosion reaction  typically takes place due to the
      presence of three corrosion agents: gases (hydrogen sulphide, oxygen and carbon dioxide),
      dissolved salts (sodium chloride, potassium chloride, calcium chloride, etc.) and acids (carbonic
       acid, formic acid and acetic acid).

       In order to limit corrosion in water based drilling fluid, the following guidelines should be adhered
        to:

      •     If H2S contamination is not anticipated, maintain a pH of the drilling fluid at 9.5 or higher.
          This will minimise the general corrosion and pitting corrosion that takes place due to the
         presence of dissolved oxygen.
      •     If H2S contamination is anticipated, maintain the pH of the drilling fluid at 11 or greater
          through additions of caustic and/or Lime.
      •     If H2S is detected, scavenger should be used.

          If the drilling fluid system requires that a low pH be maintained, treat the mud with a suitable
      scavenger and/or corrosion inhibitor. Concentrations should be specified only after pilot testing
      since over-treatment can actually increase the corrosion rate.

      •      If the drilling fluid becomes aerated, operate the degasser until the condition dissipate. If
           possible, pre-mix additives in a mixing tank prior to addition to the active system, this will
          decrease entrained air entering the mud pump system and subsequently the drill string.
      •   Use corrosion rings for monitoring.

6.5  Drill String Operation Practices
     The DP, HWDP, DC are an important part of the drilling equipment cost, but the consequence of
     a downhole failure can be even greater.

     Care must be taken while handling these tubulars, especially for the tool joint which is generally
      the “weakest point”.

6.5.1 Recommendations for Handling New tubulars:
     The break-in period of a tool joint’s life is the most critical part, as newly machined surfaces are
      the most likely to gall. After some service, the surface undergoes changes which make them
     more resistant to galling.

     As a consequence, the  first couple of times tool joints are used, the following should be
      considered:

       1.  Make sure surface handling equipment is in good condition. Check slips and master bushing
           to prevent damage. Check that iron roughneck/tong dies are in good condition.
       2.  Make sure that the top drive saver sub is in good condition as it will mate with the majority of
          the joints.
       3.  Use thread protectors when picking up tubulars
       4.  Thoroughly clean all pin and box threads to remove all grease, dirt, rust, preventive coating
           or other foreign material
       5.  Inspect for any damage on threads and for handling damage on threads and shoulder, such
         as scratches, gouges and flat spots.


                                   Page 23 of 28                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 182 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

       6.  Thoroughly coat the shoulder and threads on both box and pin using a recommended tool
             joint compound.
       7.  Spin in new joints “Slowly”. High speed rotation may cause galling, Make-up joint with
        recommended torque.
       8.  Break out connection. Clean and inspect for damage, repair minor damage if possible
       9.  Re-dope and re-make to recommended torque

6.5.2 General Recommendations
      •    Drill string component should be equipped with thread protectors when not in use and when
          being picked up or laid down
      •   Ensure tool joint threads are clean and dry before doping them
      •  Use tool joint dope specified. Do not use tubing or casing lubricants as they are to slick and
         can result in stretched and cracked pins. After break-in, it is satisfactory to thoroughly dope
          the box threads and shoulder only
      •    Lift sub pins should be cleaned, inspected and lubricated on each trip. If damage to these
          pins goes unnoticed, they will eventually damage all the drill collars boxes
      •     It  is recommended practice to break a different joint on each  trip, giving the crew an
          opportunity to look at each pin and box every third trip. This ensures that the connections
          are adequately doped at all times. Inspect the shoulders for sign of loose connections. Galls
        and possible washouts
      •  Do not allow the pin end to be stabbed against the box shoulder. This can produce a low
          spot on the shoulder which will result in a washout.
      •  Do not stop downward movement of the drill string with slips. This can cause crushing or
         necking down of the drill pipe tube. Allowing slips to ride the pipe on trips out of the hole can
          also damage the pipe
      •   Accidental catching of tool joints with slips will permanently damage the slips. This could
          lead to slips failing, or damaging the pipe. In the event of such an accident, the slips should
        be inspected for deformations, breakage or cracks.
      •  Make sure the setback areas are clean and the wood in good condition. Use only tools
         designed to move joints on the setback. Sharp-edged tools can cause shoulder damage
         which will lead to washouts
      •  Wash out  drill string components when laying them out. Ensure thread protectors are
            installed.
      •   Inspect  drill string components at regular intervals. e.g. at the end of every well, at six
        months intervals or as specified by operator contract. Inspection should be as per API RP7G
           or DS Hill Standard.





                                   Page 24 of 28                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 183 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

APPENDIX 1

Calculation of BSR
    BSR is calculated using the following equation

                      D 4 - b 4 
         Z b         D           BSR =   =
         Z p    R 4 - d 4 
             R                                                          

     Where  BSR   = Bending Strength Ratio
               Zb     = Box Section Modulus (in3)
               Zp     = Pin Section Modulus (in3)
          D     = Outside Diameter of Box (in)
             d     = Inside Diameter of pin (in)
             b     = Thread root diameter of box threads at end of pin (in)
          R     = Thread root diameter of pin threads ¾” from shoulder of pin (in)
               tpr (L pc - 0.625) )     b = C -                    + (2 × dedendum )
                   12        

     Where  C     = pitch diameter (in)
                   tpr    = taper (inches per foot on diameter)
                  Lpc    = length of pin (in)
    dedendum = (0.5H - f rn )

     Where  H     = thread height not truncated (in)
                         frn     = aper (inches per foot on diameter)

                                   tpr    R = C - (2 × dedendum ) -     
                                   96 

        All of the variables in the above equations are specific to the various connections types and are
       available from various tables in API 7, IADC Drilling Manual or manufacturers catalogues.
       Details of common API and Regular connections are shown in Appendix 2

Calculation of Tool Joint Make Up Torque
     Recommended make up torque is calculated using the following equation

      S × A  P  R t f            T =         +     + R s f         12      2π  cosθ             

     Where  T     = makeup torque (ft lb)
           S     = desired stress level from makeup (see table below)
              Connection Type                Desired Stress (psi)
      Used DP Tool Joints                             72,000
     New DP Tool Joints                              60,000
     PAC DC                                        87,500
      H90 DC                                        56,200
       Other DC                                       62,500



                                   Page 25 of 28                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 184 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
               DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

       A     = the smallest of the cross sectional area ¾” from the pin shoulder or 3/8” from
                    the box shoulder


                                                       2                  D 2 - (Q c - E )            A b = 0.25π[                                                          ]

              Qc  = box counterbore (in)

                           3tpr
               E =
                     96

                                                2 - d 2                  C - B )            A p = 0.25π[(                                                        ]

                                           tpr                B = (H - 2S rs ) +     
                                           96 

                   Srs = root truncation (in)

       P     = lead of threads (in)
          Rt     = average mean radius of thread (in)

                                               tpr            R t = 0.25 C + C - (L pc - 0.625 ) ×                                                  12  

                f      = coefficient of friction (assume 0.08)
        θ     = ½ thread angle
        Rs    = mean shoulder radius (in)
                              (Q c + D )          R s =
                    4

All of the variables in the above equations are specific to the various connections types and are
available from various tables in API 7, IADC Drilling Manual or manufacturers catalogues.
.





                             Page 26 of 28                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 185 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                                       Root of    of                                                   from                                                                                  Threads      Pin
                                                   3/4"                                                                                                              Shoulder                                  2.19416 2.50716 3.02216 3.37016 3.64716 3.91116 4.25616 4.46516 4.88086 5.44537 6.00737 6.88237 7.57037                                                          Thread Diameter Pin    R in.



              b in.                                       Root of Threads Pinof                                                                                                                     2.09917 2.41217 2.84384 3.15017 3.38551 3.56617 3.91117 4.12017 4.53587 4.66163 5.09863 5.84863 6.41163                                                          Thread Diameter Box Endat


                             Box          Qc in.                                                                                                                     2.62500 2.93750 3.45313 3.81250 4.07813 4.34375 4.68750 4.90625 5.31250 5.93750 6.50000 7.37500 8.06250                                                                                                                      Counterbore





                 3 3                      4                            5                              6                                                                                      5.5                                                                                             6.5                                                                    4.5 4.5 4.5 4.5                                                          Length                Lpc in.                                                         3.5 3.75
                             Pin



              C in.                                                Pitch                                                                                    2.355 2.668 3.183 3.531 3.808 4.072 4.417 4.626 5.0417 5.616 6.178 7.053 7.741                                                                                      Diameter
                                                                                                                                                                                                       2000
COURSE                                                                  Dedendum                                                         0.07000 0.07000 0.07000 0.07000 0.07000 0.07000 0.07000 0.07000 0.07000 0.06969 0.06969 0.06969 0.06969                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             November
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Rev.0,                                       Root                frn in.                                                                                                           Truncation                                                          0.038000  0.038000  0.038000  0.038000  0.038000  0.038000  0.038000  0.038000  0.038000  0.038000  0.038000  0.038000  0.038000PRACTICES
                                Not
              H in.                                                          Thread                                                                           Height, Truncated                                                    0.216005  0.216005  0.216005  0.216005  0.216005  0.216005  0.216005  0.216005  0.216005  0.215379  0.215379  0.215379  0.215379                                                ConnectionsDRILLING
             API                                 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30    –        Angle                                                                                                   28                                                                                                             Degrees
                                                                                                   of
                                                                                                   27

                                          tpr  2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 3 3 3 3                                                Taper                                         in./ft                                                                                                                             Page                                           Dimensions
                             per

                                in.       4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4
                                                                    Threads                                           Connection                                       Form
                                                          Thread                                                                 V-0.038R  V-0.038R  V-0.038R  V-0.038R  V-0.038R  V-0.038R  V-0.038R  V-0.038R  V-0.038R  V-0.038R  V-0.038R  V-0.038R  V-0.038R
  2                                   Shoulder
                                           Type                                                                   NC23 NC26 NC31 NC35 NC38 NC40 NC44 NC46 NC50 NC56 NC61 NC70 NC77                                                                                                 Connection                   Appendix      Rotary


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 186 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                                Root of    of                                            from                                                                       Threads      Pin
                                            3/4"                                                                                                 Shoulder                                  2.20182 2.57682 3.07632 4.20132 5.03739 5.57096 6.51790 7.46995                                                Thread Diameter Pin    R in.



             b in.                                Root of Threads Pinof                                                                                                            1.90392 2.15392 2.59092 3.59092 4.36815 5.19464 5.72366 6.64446                                                Thread Diameter Box Endat


                        Box          Qc in.                                                                                                            2.68750 3.06250 3.56250 4.68750 5.57813 6.06250 7.09375 8.04688                                                                                                    Counterbore





               3                     5                                                Length                Lpc in.                                                  3.5 3.75 4.25 4.75                                                                                          5.25 5.375
                        Pin



             C in.                                        Pitch                                                                         Diameter                                                   2.36537 2.74037 3.23987 4.36487 5.23402 5.7578 6.71453 7.66658
                                                                                                                                                                                                       2000
COURSE                                                    Dedendum                                                         0.06615 0.06615 0.06615 0.06615 0.08269 0.08300 0.08269 0.08269                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             November
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Rev.0,                                Root                frn in.                                                                                           Truncation                                                          0.020000  0.020000  0.020000  0.020000  0.025000  0.025000  0.025000  0.025000PRACTICES
                           Not                                    Connections        H in.                                                Thread                                                               Height, Truncated                                                    0.172303  0.172303  0.172303  0.172303  0.215379  0.216005  0.215379  0.215379DRILLING                       Regular                               30 30 30 30 30 30 30 30   –        Angle                                                                                                   28                                                                                                   degrees
                                                                                                   of
                                                                                                   28

                                      tpr  3 3 3 3 3 2 3 3                                        Taper                                         in./ft                                                                                                                                   Page                                 Dimensions
                        per

                           in.       5 5 5 5 4 4 4 4
                                                        Threads                                 Connection                                Form
                                                                                                            V-0.040 V-0.040 V-0.040 V-0.040 V-0.050 V-0.050 V-0.050 V-0.050                                                Thread                          Shoulder                                              REG REG REG REG REG REG REG REG
                                    Type                                                                                Connection                                                                             2-3/8 2-7/8 3-1/2 4-1/2 5-1/2 6-5/8 7-5/8 8-5/8                    Rotary


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 187 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

                    SECTION 9

         SURVEYING & DIRECTIONAL DRILLING


     Contents
1.0    Surveying                                                                   3
  1.1 Why Survey?                                                                3
  1.2  Models of the Earth                                                           3
  1.3 The Geoid                                                                  3
  1.4 The Spheroid                                                                3
  1.5  Grid Systems                                                                6
     1.5.1  Universal Transverse Mercator Grid (UTM)                                     6
     1.5.2  Lambert Conformal Conic Projection                                          7
     1.5.3  Other Grids                                                              8
  1.6  Magnetic Declination                                                          8
  Mapping grids                                                                   10
  1.8 Summary                                                                  12
2.0    Surveying Tools                                                             12
  2.1  Tool Selection Factors                                                        13
  2.2  Magnetic Tools                                                              13
     2.2.1  Photographic Magnetic Survey Tools                                         13
     2.2.2  Magnetic Single Shot                                                     13
     2.2.3  Magnetic Drop-Type Survey                                                14
     2.2.4  Magnetic Multi-Shot (MMS)                                                14
     2.2.5  Electronic Magnetic Multi-Shot (EMS)                                        14
  2.3  Gyroscopic Survey Tools                                                      15
     2.3.1  Gyroscopic Single Shot                                                   15
     2.3.2  Gyroscopic Multi Shot                                                     15
     2.3.3  Surface Read-Out Gyro (SRG)                                              15
     2.3.4  Ring Laser Inertial Guidance Surveyor – “RIGS”                                15
  2.4 MWD Survey Measurement Systems                                             16
     2.4.1   Inclination only MWD                                                     16
     2.4.2  Magnetic Interference                                                     16
3.0    Methods of Survey Calculations                                                 19
  3.1  Tangential Method                                                           19
  3.2  Average Angle Method                                                        20
  3.3  Radius of Curvature Method                                                    20
  3.4 Minimum Curvature Method                                                    21
  3.5  Survey Uncertainty                                                           22
4.0     Directional Drilling                                                            22
  4.1 Why Directionally Drill?                                                        22
  4.2  Deflection Techniques                                                        23
     4.2.1  Whipstocks                                                             23
     4.2.2   Jetting                                                                 23
     4.2.3  Rotary Drilling                                                           23
     4.2.4  Motors                                                                 23
  4.3  Directional Control with Rotary Systems                                          23
     4.3.1  Gauge and Placement of Stabilisers                                         24
     4.3.2  Diameter of Drill Collars                                                   26
     4.3.3   Bit Type                                                                26
     4.3.4  Formation Anisotropy                                                     27
     4.3.5  Formation Hardness                                                      29
  4.4  Directional Control with Downhole Motors                                         29
     4.4.1  Turbines                                                               30
     4.4.2   Positive Displacement Motors                                              30
     4.4.3   Bit Tilt                                                                 31
     4.4.4  Reactive Torque                                                         32
     4.4.5   Stabiliser Size and Placement                                              32
     4.4.6  Amount of Slide Drilling                                                   33

                                   Page 1 of 36                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 188 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

5.0    Typical Bottom Hole Assemblies                                                34
  5.1  Rotary Assemblies                                                           34
     5.1.1  BHA for Holding                                                         34
     5.1.2  BHA for Building                                                         34
     5.1.3  BHA for Dropping                                                        34
  5.2  Steerable Assemblies                                                         35
     5.2.1  BHA for 17½” Hole – Holding Tendency in Rotary                               35
     5.2.2  BHA for 17½” Hole – Build Tendency in Rotary                                 35
     5.2.3  BHA for 12¼” Hole – Holding Tendency in Rotary                               35
     5.2.4  BHA for 12¼” Hole – Building Tendency in Rotary                               35
  5.3  Rotary Steerable Assemblies                                                   36





                                   Page 2 of 36                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 189 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE



1.0  Surveying

1.1 Why Survey?
      Accurate data about the position of a borehole is required in order to monitor and control where
     a borehole is and where it is going for the following reasons:
      •  To hit geological targets
      •  To provide a better  definition of geological and reservoir data to allow for production
          optimisation
      •  To avoid collision with other wells
      •  To define the target of a relief well for blowout contingency planning
      •  To provide accurate vertical depths for the purpose of well control
      •  To provide data for operational activities such as running and cementing casing
      •  To fulfil the requirements of local legislation

1.2  Models of the Earth
     The earth is commonly described as a spherical object but  it has a very irregular surface and
       carries mountain chains and deep sea canyons in excess of 5 miles above and below mean sea
       level. The problem confronting surveyors is how to represent any point on the earth's surface on
     a flat sheet. Small areas of the earth may appear to have a flat surface but, by and large, this is
      not the case. This has rendered it necessary to look more closely at the shape of the earth so
       that a method of representing this shape on a flat surface can be used.

1.3  The Geoid
    A smoothed surface representing the earth’s surface and referred to as the geoid can be
     produced but  it is impossible to describe any point on this surface mathematically. The geoid
       effectively smoothes out the irregularities of the earth’s surface but, in so doing, creates an
       irregular shaped object itself. If mean sea level could be established everywhere, then this would
     be the surface of the geoid. All astronomical observations are made relative to the geoid and
      astronomical latitudes and longitudes are positions on the geoid.

1.4  The Spheroid
     The earth can be more accurately represented in shape by that of an oblate spheroid flattened at
      the poles by approximately one part in three hundred due to rotation. This can be described
      mathematically by an algebraic equation which can then be used as the basis for calculations.
     Over a dozen  different  ellipsoid shapes  describing the  earth mathematically have been
      generated and are in use today.





                                   Page 3 of 36                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 190 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
               DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


                G

         P

                                                                              Earth's Surface


                                                                   Geoid Surface
                                       L


                                                                         Spheroid Surface





                                                                       G'




        O                                Q

                         Fig 1 - Shapes representing the earth

In 1924, an official ellipsoid was defined (based on the existing Hayford Ellipsoid of 1909) and
called the International  Ellipsoid. This had a  flattening factor of 1:297, a polar radius  of
6,356,911.9m and an equatorial one of 6,378,388m. Many countries did not adopt this and
chose, instead, to define  their own because of irregularities in the spheroid’s shape over
different parts of the globe. The current range of spheroid’s used is tabulated below.

    Name        Date        Equatorial      Polar Radius,     Flattening          Use
                               Radius, m       m              factor
    GRS        1980       6,378,136       6,356,752.3     1/298.257      Newly adopted
  WGS 72°      1972       6,378,135       6,356,750.5       1/298.6         NASA
     Australia      1965       6,378,160       6,356,774.7      1/298.25           Australia
   Krasovsky      1940       6,378,245       6,356,863.0      1/298.25         Soviet Union
   International     1924       6,378,388       6,356,911.9       1/297         Rest of world
    Hayford       1909       6,378,388       6,356,911.9       1/297         Rest of world
     Clarke       1880       6,378,249.1      6,356,514.9      1/293.46         Africa, France
     Clarke       1886       6,378,206.4      6,356,583.9      1/294.98       North America,
                                                                                          Philippines
       Airy        1849       6,377,563.4      6,356,256.9      1/299.32        Great Britain
     Bessel       1841       6,377,397.2      6,356,079.0      1/299.15      Central Europe, Chile,
                                                                                             Indonesia
     Everset       1830       6,377,276.3      6,356,075.4       1/300.8       India, Burma, Pakistan,
                                                                                        Afghan, Thailand





                              Page 4 of 36                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 191 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
               DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE



                                       P


                                                          A
                                                           Polar Axis


                                            b


                                     M
                                                                  a

                       Equatorial Plane
                                O                    Q
                                            C




                                           L



                            Figure 2

Fig 2 represents a meridian section of a spheroid through its polar axis OP. OQ represents the
plane of the equator. The figure is an ellipse defined by the lengths of OQ and OP.
To calculate connecting points on this surface,  it is first necessary to develop formulae linking
the curvature of this surface with the elements a, b and f as defined below.

f = (a – b)/a

Where                  f = flattening factor
              a = length of OQ (semi major axis) or the equatorial radius
              b = length of OP (semi minor axis) or the polar radius

Thus, we now have three shapes depicting the earth – its actual irregular shape, the geoid
(smooth earth) and an ellipsoid (mathematically defined shape that most closely fits the geoid).
Measurements made on the earth can be transferred to the geoid surface with minimal error.
The spheroid that is the closest  fit to the geoid can be defined by observing its Meridian arcs
(see fig 3).

                  P
                           C

                                  D

                                          A
                                                      Rotation
             of                                      B
                           Axis





               O          V   M     N     Q

                                     Plane of the Equator


                       Fig 3

Fig 3 represents a meridian section through a spheroid whose shape is to be compared with that
of the geoid. The shape of the ellipse PAQ can be calculated if lengths OQ and OP are known.
The latitudes at A and B can be determined astronomically. The position of B can also be
determined mathematically by analysing the spheroid surface specified by known lengths OP


                              Page 5 of 36                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 192 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

     and OQ and by using the initial fixed point at A. It can also be determined by triangulation. The
     base line at A (spheroid surface) is dropped to sea level (geoid surface). Careful triangulation
        will enable the position of B to be determined. The difference in the position of B between the
      two methods above and that determined astronomically  is a measure of how closely the
      spheroid matches the geoid. The above should be repeated for several meridians at differing
       latitudes to confirm the match i.e. repeat with points C and D. Gradually, the lengths of OP and
    OQ are varied until a close fit between the geoid and spheroid is obtained.

1.5  Grid Systems
      Grid systems are lines running east-west and north-south to generate a pattern of squares. In
      attempting to superimpose a grid system over a map of the earth, problems arise in trying to
      represent the spherical surface of the earth in two dimensions without incurring too much
       distortion. The cartographer must decide which characteristics he wishes to display precisely at
      the expense of others. Different grid systems are in use today to project part of the earth onto a
        flat surface and are generally classified according to their method of construction with regard to
      the shape of the developed surface used i.e. cylindrical (UTM) and conical (Lambert).

1.5.1 Universal Transverse Mercator Grid (UTM)
      This is the most common world-wide grid system used today and is based on the Cylindrical
      Mercator Conformal Projection developed by Johannes Lambert in 1772. In this projection, the
      spheroid representing the earth is wrapped in a cylinder which touches the surface of the
      spheroid along a chosen line of longitude (Fig 4).





                                    Fig 4 - Transverse cylindrical map projection

     The UTM grid divides the world into 60 equal zones between 80°N and 80°S and each are 6°
      wide being numbered 1 to 60 beginning at the International date line (180°W) and reading
      eastward round the globe. Each zone is flattened and a square grid superimposed on  it. Any
       point in the zone can be referred to by its zone number, its distance in metres from the equator
       (northing) and its distance in metres from the north-south reference line (easting).
     To avoid negative numbers, an arbitrary value of 500,000 metres easting is assigned to the
       central meridian in each zone. Easting values typically range from 200,000 metres to 800,000
      metres at the equator (spanning the 3° either side of the central meridian in any zone).

      Northings for a point north of the equator begin with a value of zero at the equator increasing
      northwards. For points to the south of the equator, the equator is assigned an arbitrary value of
      10,000,000 metres and values decrease southwards.





                                   Page 6 of 36                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 193 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE





                                                           Central Meridian, bisecting zone
                                                        (assigned false easting = 500,000 m)

                                        500,000 m




                                                          Zone narrows as it
                                                               approaches the poles





                             Origin of                 3°      3°
                              false easting  A              B

                                                                   Equator
                                                                     (assigned northing value:
                                                         = 0 m for Northern Hemishere
                                                         = 10,000,000 m for Southern Hemisphere)





                                             6°



                                                   (approximately
                                              600,000 m)

                               Fig 5 UTM Grid Zone

1.5.2 Lambert Conformal Conic Projection
      This projection was first described by Lambert in 1772 but was little used until the First World
     War when France made use of  it in drawing up battle maps. This system uses a cone as
     opposed to a cylinder to cover the spheroid being considered. This produces a representation
      with lines of longitude appearing as convergent lines and lines of latitude as arcs of circles.





                                               Fig 6 Regular conic map projection



                                   Page 7 of 36                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 194 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

     The scale along the parallels is usually undistorted and a pair of parallels suitably separated
     would be selected for a particular area of interest. This system is utilised by 48 states in the USA
       (including most of the oil producing states). The grids across each state are measured in feet
      with the east-west axis assigned a value of zero whilst the north-south axis is assigned a value
       of 2,000,000ft. The example below is for the South Louisiana Lambert System.

                                                Longitude    91° 20' W = 2,000,000ft


                                Decrease                             Increase


                                                                                       Increase




                            Latitude 28° 40' N = 0ft





                                                                               Decrease





                             Fig 7 - South Louisiana Lambert System

1.5.3 Other Grids
     There are other grid systems in use, such as:
      Universal Polar Stereographic Grid (UPS) used in the polar regions.
      Transverse Mercator (Gauss-Kriiger) with 6° zones used in the FSU, China and Eastern Block.

1.6  Magnetic Declination
     The earth possesses a magnetic field due to its relatively iron-rich core. The lines of force
      associated with this field are horizontal at the equator whilst, at the poles, they are represented
     by vertical lines. The Dip angle is the angle between the horizontal and magnetic lines of force.
     The poles of this magnetic field “wander” with time and the difference between their position i.e.
      magnetic north, and the geographical poles i.e. true north (the axis about which rotation of the
      earth occurs) is known as the Magnetic Declination. The actual measured distance is about
     1000 miles. The angle of declination is taken to be the angle between the horizontal component
       of the earth’s magnetic field and the lines of longitude.





                                   Page 8 of 36                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 195 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
               DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

The magnetic field strength is measured in micro Tesla (mT) and  it varies from 30 mT at the
equator to 60 mT at the Poles.

                           Geomagnetic axis                                                           Rotational axis




                  Magnetic North Pole

                                                               Geographic North Pole





                                S
                                                                       Magnetic Equator

                                                       Core                              N



                                                                              Earth's Surface





                Fig 8 - Magnetic surveys follow the flux lines of the earth

An Isogonic Chart is a map along with lines of equal declination super-imposed and is usually
accompanied with an annual correction figure that should be applied following the date of
production of the chart. Declination can either be West or East i.e. West Declination means that
the magnetic pole is to the left of true north.

Example
Magnetic declination of Houston from the 1985 Isogonic chart was 7° east. The annual change
is about 8’ per year West (note 1° = 60’).
In 1991, the magnetic declination should have changed:
8’ per year x 6 years = 48’ West
The new magnetic declination in 1991 = 7° 0’ – 0° 48’ = 6° 12’ east.

To convert from magnetic north to true north is a matter of simply considering the positions of
the two poles in relation to the magnetic reading:





                              Page 9 of 36                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 196 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


     Example
      Convert the following magnetic north readings to true north.

       1. N 45 E (Azimuth 45) with 5° East declination.  Answer: N 50 E ( 50)

                                  TN
                                   MN

                                                                      Magnetic (N45E)
                                                                     True North (N50E)

                                                  5°
                                                     45°





                   Fig 9.1

       2. S 80 W (Azimuth 260) with 5° West declination.      Answer: S 75 W (255)


                                        TN
                              MN


                                                       5°





                                                         255

             Magnetic (S80W)
             True North (S75W)                80

                                          75°

                 Fig 9.2


1.7  Mapping grids
    On land, surveys are corrected to True North whilst offshore, they are corrected to the Grid
      North Standard. A grid system is merely a rectangular co-ordinate system charted on a map. An


                                   Page 10 of 36                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 197 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
               DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

arbitrary latitude and longitude has usually been selected and in this instance Grid North
coincides with True North (fig 10).

                  N


                         E


                                                                           Grid Projection



                        GN    TN      TN   GN

          Grid North                                                       Grid North
         (West of True North)                                              (East of True North)



          Meridian of Longitude



                                                                      Rings of Latitude





                                            Central Meridian
                                        True North = Grid North

           Fig 10 Grid North vs Geographical North

Grid Declination – angular correction converting readings of Magnetic North to Grid North.
Grid convergence – angle between True North and Grid North.





                             Page 11 of 36                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 198 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


                                               GN   TN     MN

                                                                                3°
                      Grid Convergence = 3°W                              5°
                     Magnetic Declination = 5° E

                      Grid Declination = 8°E





                                                          TN                                                      GN MN

                      Grid Convergence = 3°E                              3°  5°
                     Magnetic Declination = 8°E

                      Grid Declination = 5°E




                                             MN   TN  GN

                      Grid Convergence = 2°E                          4°   2°
                     Magnetic Declination = 4°W

                      Grid Declination = 6°W




                      Note:
              GN = Grid North
                TN = True North
             MN = Magnetic North

                        Fig 11 - Relationship between Grid, True & Magnetic North

      Misunderstandings  surrounding  the  relationships between  these  various  references has
     prompted serious survey errors in the past. Polar diagrams, as above, should be included with
         all survey data to clarify which reference system is being used.

1.8 Summary
      Using the previous information,  it is now possible to calculate with reasonable precision where
     we are in relation to other points on the earth’s surface. However, it is imperative that one knows
      which model and grid system is being used. These will vary from area to area. UK Ordnance
      Survey maps are derived from the Airy Spheroid based on measurements of the Greenwich
      Meridian and use the British National Grid. For North Sea offshore positioning and survey work,
      normal practice is to work with the International Spheroid based on the Central Meridian (3°
      east) on a UTM grid projection. Near shore areas of the North Sea can thus be very confusing
      regarding which systems are being used. The moral  is to ensure that the systems being
      referenced are clearly stated on the survey data before such data is used.

2.0  Surveying Tools

      Surveying is the science of accurately locating a point in space. In well construction this means
      accurately locating a point in the wellbore. It enables the bottom hole location to be determined
       relative to a surface location at a given vertical depth. It also provides information on wellpath
       irregularities (doglegs), drift during drilling and the orientation of deflecting tools.

      Current systems include telemetry, electronic measurement packages, photographic based
     systems and continuous surface read-out systems.




                                   Page 12 of 36                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 199 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

2.1  Tool Selection Factors
    A number of factors will influence survey tool selection:
      •   Target size – the size of the target will influence how accurate the survey must be.
      •    Latitude of the well – greater the latitude, the greater the affect on both magnetic and rate
          gyroscopic tools.
      •   Target directions – east/west surveys require special procedures for both magnetic and
           north seeking gyroscopic sensors.
      •   Type of installation – presence of magnetic interference on multi-well platforms.
      •   Rig costs – MWD system might be more cost effective on high day-rate rig.
      •   Maximum inclination proposed – some survey tools have hole angle limitations.
      •   Hole conditions – high temperature, open or small hole size may limit the use of some
             tools.
      •   Survey depth – the accuracy of a survey is dependent on the depth.
      •   Open or cased hole – impact on magnetic tools.


2.2  Magnetic Tools

2.2.1 Photographic Magnetic Survey Tools
        All these tools must be run inside a non-magnetic drill collar (manufactured from a nickel alloy)
       to eliminate any magnetic interference from the drill string.

2.2.2 Magnetic Single Shot
     Used to record simultaneously the magnetic direction of an uncased borehole and its inclination
      from the vertical. Component parts comprise:
      •   Timing device or a motion sensor
      •  Camera
      •   Angle indicating unit

     Due to the uncertainties regarding the time taken for the tool to drop from the surface down to
      the survey depth, a motion sensor was developed to supersede the timer. After the tool has
     been “armed” and launched in a protective barrel (1.75” or 1.375”) either on wireline or free-fall,
     once  it becomes stationary on bottom, electronic  circuitry within the tool senses this and
       activates the camera. The pre-focused camera records both a magnetic compass orientation
     and the position of a plumb bob giving the angle of inclination. The film discs with angle
       indicating scales on them are available in various ranges depending on the hole angle e.g. 0 -
      10°, 0 - 20° and 15 - 90°. Back on surface, the disc is extracted, developed and read to provide
      hole orientation.

     The Single Shot  is normally run on wireline during the  drilling phase to provide a single
     measurement for current bottom-hole orientation or  it can be launched free-fall onto a dull bit
       prior to tripping.





                                   Page 13 of 36                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 200 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE





                           Image on Film Disc





                                      Pendulum




                                          10
                    Ring Glass with Scale
                                              5
                                                   5   10



                                    N
                    Compass Card                     W
                                             E

                                     S

                                                                          Vertical


                             Fig 12

2.2.3 Magnetic Drop-Type Survey
      This tool is similar to that above except that  it uses 10mm film to enable several different
      surveys to be recorded. The tool is launched and eventually seats in a catcher just above the
         bit. A mechanical timer, synchronised with a stopwatch at surface, enables a series of surveys to
     be stored as the drill string is recovered giving a very simple view of the open hole orientation.

2.2.4 Magnetic Multi-Shot (MMS)
      This is normally run at the end of a section and is used to record the orientation of a wellbore.
     The tool is a battery-powered unit comprising a timing device, a camera loaded with 16mm film
     and a compass/ pendulum assembly and is normally encased in a 1.75” barrel. A mini multi-shot
      version in a 1.375” barrel is also available. Essentially, the tool takes a photograph of the
     compass/ pendulum periodically as the drill string is pulled out. Once back on surface, the film
     can be developed, correlated against depth and the open hole section orientation plotted out.

2.2.5 Electronic Magnetic Multi-Shot (EMS)
      This is the latest technology and comprises both tri-axial accelerometers and magnetometers for
      taking measurements of hole angle and direction. It also calculates magnetic dip angle and field
      strength at each survey station. These are used to calculate downhole magnetic interference
       giving greater confidence in the survey data. The tool also measures downhole temperature over
      the range 0 - 125°C (32 - 257°F).  After arming at surface, the tool is run in a similar manner to
      the simpler multi-shot and can be programmed to operate in either single shot, multi-shot or core
       orientation mode. Survey data for up to 1023 data points can be stored.

      Following the survey, the tool is re-connected to the system computer and the information
      processed using a reference tie-in point i.e. previous casing shoe. As an option to running the
      required length of NMDC’s to avoid interference,  it is possible to shorten this and apply a
      correction to eliminate any additional interference.





                                   Page 14 of 36                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 201 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

2.3  Gyroscopic Survey Tools
     Where magnetic interference cannot be averted, gyroscopic systems are used. There are two
      types of gyro used – those that drift with time and those that sense the rotation of the earth i.e.
       “rate gyros”. These can be run without non-magnetic drill collars since the magnetic compass is
      replaced by a gyro compass disc controlled by a high RPM electric motor.

2.3.1 Gyroscopic Single Shot
     Used to orient tools in areas of high magnetic interference e .g. kicking off on a platform well
      with other conductors around. The tool consists of a timing device, a camera section and a very
       sensitive gyro compass. The gyro is first oriented at surface to a known direction and then
      lowered to the survey depth in a protective casing. After recording the survey, the tool is
      recovered and the film unloaded and developed.

2.3.2 Gyroscopic Multi Shot
      This is used to record the orientation of a cased or uncased wellbore. The tool is a battery
     powered similar to the magnetic multi-shot. The gyro unit  is  initially aligned with a known
       direction and the timing device synchronised with a surface watch. It is then run in on wireline
     and surveys are taken as the tool is going down. This reduces the error due to gyro drift which
      increases non-uniformly with time. To correct for this, several drift checks are made both running
       in and pulling out. At these, the tool is held stationary while a number of surveys are taken at the
     same location. These can then be compared afterwards to enable a  drift correction to be
       applied.

2.3.3 Surface Read-Out Gyro (SRG)
     Example – Seeker from BHI, Keeper from Sperry Sun
     Used for drilling and orienting in high cost areas where magnetic interference is a problem e.g.
      kicking off platform wells adjacent to other conductors. The tool is connected to a direct surface
      read-out system via a hard wired cable and side entry sub. Once the desired orientation has
     been achieved, the tool is recovered to allow the side entry sub to be removed. Later variants
     now come equipped with a wet connect that enables the electrical lead to be severed and rotary
        drilling to continue for a period without pulling the assembly.

     The gyro system used in the SRG comprises an orthogonal axis (all at right angles to each
       other) accelerometer and magnetometer. The accelerometer measures the gravitational vector
       relative to the tool axis from which the tool face and inclination can be determined. The
     magnetometer measures the components of the earth’s magnetic field relative to the tool axis
      which, when combined with the accelerometer readings, determines the azimuth.

2.3.4 Ring Laser Inertial Guidance Surveyor – “RIGS”
      This is a high accuracy, high-speed surveying system which gathers survey data as the tool is
      run through the borehole. It comprises a three axis inertial navigation system and is accurate to
       within 1-2ft/ 1000ft of hole surveyed with a horizontal accuracy of 2.6ft/ 1000ft. These results are
       typically three times more accurate and completed in half the time compared with using a rate
       gyro.

      At the beginning of the survey, the tool is aligned to derive a true north reference by measuring
      the earth’s rotation. As  it is then lowered into the well, the inertial navigation system measures
      the changes in 3-dimensional space generating co-ordinates for north/south, east/west and
     down along the wellbore. This continuous monitoring system eliminates the errors generated
      using a point to point wellbore geometry survey calculation method as used with rate gyros and
      conventional survey systems.

    A precision wireline depth measurement system and a casing collar locator are used to verify
      sensor depth and restrict errors to less than 0.5ft/ 1000ft whilst roller centralisers keep the tool
      centralised within the wellbore. The tool can only be used in hole/casing sizes down to 7” due to
         its physical size.
    A typical survey using the RIGS system would comprise:


                                   Page 15 of 36                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 202 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      •   Align the sensor at surface - 12 mins
      •   Perform a drift check – 3 mins
      •  Run the tool into the hole at 300ft/min
      •   At final depth, perform inertial drift check – 3 mins
      •   Retrieve the tool while completing second survey at 300ft/ min
      •   At surface, complete a final drift check – 3 mins
      Total time to survey a simple 10,000ft well = 88 mins

2.4 MWD Survey Measurement Systems
     The MWD systems of today evolved from the hard wired surface read-out systems. Power is
      generated either downhole via a mud turbine or from batteries. Data transfer is by pressure
      pulse via the drilling fluid column (either negative or positive pulse).

     These systems were developed in the 1970’s with Teleco being the first company to provide one
      commercially in 1978. These became common place during the 1980’s and have continued to
     be developed with additional sensors now being the norm e.g. Gamma Ray and Resistivity
      sensors. These systems are, however, still magnetic measurement based and must therefore
     be compensated or protected from magnetic interference.

2.4.1 Inclination only MWD
     Example: Teledrift or Anderdrift
     These systems comprise a mechanical  signalling  instrument capable  of  detecting  hole
       inclinations up to 10.5° (Anderdrift 5°, Teledrift 10.5°). Signal transmission is by way of a series
       of mud pulses which are detected by a transducer usually sited on the standpipe.

       In principle, the downhole tool contains a pendulum at the bottom of the tool that is able to move
      along a series of shoulders and a signal plunger at the top capable of traversing a series of
      annular restrictions. The  latter creates the mud pulses. In the Teledrift system, there is a
      patented coding system so that the deviation from vertical increases the number of pulses
      issued. A maximum of seven pulses can be generated (0.5°/ pulse) meaning that the tool can
      operate over a 3.5° range between 0 and 10.5°. Adjustment is easily achievable in the field to
      ensure that the tool can respond to any hole angle up to 10.5°. Several options also exist that
      enable the tool to detect a greater range of hole angle. This is done by increasing the angle
     measured per pulse such that it can either report 1° or 1.5° per pulse. This gives a maximum,
     measurable hole inclination of 15°.

     The Anderdrift system generates similar mud pulses but there is a different relationship between
      the pendulum position and the plunger. The Anderdrift can generate up to eleven pulses, again
     each representing 0.5°, but these function in a reverse manner. Thus one pulse will indicate a
      hole angle of 5° or more whilst eleven pulses indicates a hole angle of zero degrees.

      Readings, are generally taken at a connection. The pumps are shut down for about a minute to
      allow the tool to measure the  drift angle and prepare for signalling. The pipe must remain
       stationary during this period. The pumps are then re-started and brought up to a maximum of
     360gpm and held at that. With the Teledrift tool, the first pulse should arrive after about 10 –
     15secs and subsequent readings should arrive after a similar period. Pumping should continue
        until about a minute after the last recorded pulse. The pulse period for the Anderdrift tool is
      about 5 seconds.

2.4.2 Magnetic Interference
      During the drilling process, the steel components of the drill string become magnetised due to
      the earth’s magnetic flux lines. This induced magnetism influences the magnetic survey tools
     and so they must be protected by being sheathed in non-magnetic collars. The length of non-
      magnetic spacing required is dependent on the following factors:
      •   Magnetic pole field strength of the magnetised steel drill string above and below the sensing
          device.
      •   Borehole direction as related to magnetic north or south.


                                   Page 16 of 36                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 203 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      •   Borehole inclination
      •   Geographic location (related to dip angle)

2.4.2.1 Magnetic Pole Strength
     As the drill string becomes magnetised, the two ends become the magnetic poles of the string.
       In the northern hemisphere, the north pole end of the string points down the hole. The magnetic
      interference varies with the inverse square  of the distance between the source and the
      compass/sensor.

       Interfering Force = (Pole Strength)/(Distance)2

      Thus, if a force F1 is found to result from a separation of 4ft between magnetised steel collar and
      the sensor, then, at a separation of 12ft, the interfering force F2 would be:

      F1 x (4)2 = F2 x (12)2
      F2 = F1 / 9

      Since the drill string is much longer than its diameter, it can be analysed as though it comprised
      discrete point sources of magnetism located at the extreme ends of the hole. The strength of the
      magnetic poles depends on the individual steel components which make up the  drill string.
      Grindrod and Wolff in 1983 presented pole magnetic strength values for four different bottom
      hole assemblies. These generalised values are:

                   Component                          Electro-magnetic Units
      Upper drill string                                     300 EMU
         Bit, mud motor and bent sub.                          2500 EMU
         Bit, NB stab, short collar (packed assy)                   200 EMU
         Bit and NB stabiliser                                  500 EMU
       Crossovers                                         250 EMU

     The approximate pole strength is selected for the appropriate pole – either the upper pole (UP)
      or the lower pole (LP). If the pole strength is measured in microwebers (µWb), then the distance
        is in metres; if the pole strength is in electromagnetic units (EMU), then the distance is in feet.
     The upper distance (UD) and lower distance (LD) are merely the respective distances from the
      sensor to the nearest magnetised section of drill string. The interfering force (IF) can now be
       calculated:

      IF (upper) = UP/(UD)2 and
      IF (lower) = LP/(LD)2

     Thus
      IF (total) = IF (upper) + IF (lower) or
            = IF (upper 1) + IF (upper 2) + IF (lower)

     These two cases are represented schematically in figs 13A and 13B.


                                                 UP

                                                                    Upper Pole
                           Sensor        UD            UP2                                    S                 LP                              N                   LD            UP1
                                           UD2                   Upper Steel
                            Sensor  UD1                                                                               SectionS           Lower PoleLP                   LD                 N
          S          N S                   Steel Section
     N                 Non Magnetic Section    Non Magnetic
                                                                 Section
             Lower SteelS                                 Steel
     N Section                                       Stabiliser
                Steel Section             Page 17 of 36                         Rev.0, November 2000
               Fig 13A: Both lower and upper steel sections have individual poles


                Fig 13B: The steel stabiliser breaks the (upper) distance into two segments


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 204 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


2.4.2.2 Borehole Inclination
    A levelled magnetic sensing device (compass or magnetometer) only relies on the horizontal
     component  of the earth’s magnetic  field.  Similarly,   it  will be influenced by the horizontal
     component of any induced magnetism in the drill string. As the drill string approaches greater
      angles in a deviated well, then the interfering force will be greater.

2.4.2.3 Borehole Direction
     The direction (azimuth) in which the drill string is positioned is also a factor in determining the
       effect of the interfering force on the magnetic sensor. As the direction approaches due East or
     West, the effect is greatest.

      For a well being drilled in a due easterly direction, the magnetic sensor will read an azimuth that
        is smaller than the actual azimuth.

      For a well being drilled in a due westerly direction, the magnetic sensor will read an azimuth that
        is greater than the actual azimuth.



                         Magnetic North




                                             Magnetic Sensor Azimuth




                            Actual Azimuth
                                                                                                        Magnetic North
                                                          Azimuth Error

                                                             Direction of
                                                                              Drill String





                                                                       Azimuth Error


                                                                                      Direction of                  Actual Azimuth
            Fig 14: Effect of azimuth on survey readings                        Drill String




                                                                      Magnetic Sensor Azimuth




2.4.2.4 Geographical Location
      Just as a levelled sensing device will be affected by the horizontal component of the earth’s
      magnetic field, so  it will also be affected by the amplitude of this horizontal component. This
      varies with geographical location (see fig 8) and is greatest along the equator. Moving either
      north or south from the equator, the angle of dip of the earth’s magnetic field increases. The
       resultant effect of this is that the vertical component of the earth’s magnetic field increases whilst
      the horizontal component decreases. Thus, any tool that  is dependent on the horizontal
     component of the earth’s magnetic field is more likely to be affected by other horizontal field
       effects the further away from the equator that it is used.

    A magnetic sensor will therefore sense magnetic north more strongly at the equator that at the
      poles.  If there  is an interfering force present, this  will be seen to have more influence on
       directional readings nearer the poles than at the equator even though the interfering force itself
      remains the same. In effect, any lessening of the earth’s natural field allows the drill string field
       to have more impact.



                                   Page 18 of 36                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 205 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

2.4.2.5 Non-Magnetic Collar Selection
     The magnetic sensors must be housed in non-magnetic drill collars to minimise the interference
       effects derived from induced magnetism in the drill string and to prevent any distortion of the
       earth’s magnetic field in the vicinity of the sensors. The composition of the non-magnetic collars
        is usually one of the following:

       1. K Monel, an alloy containing 30% copper and 65% nickel
       2.  Chrome/ nickel steels comprising 18% chrome and 13% nickel
       3.  Austenitic steels based on chromium and manganese (> 18% Mn)
       4.  Copper beryllium bronzes

      •  K Monel and copper beryllium are expensive but are corrosion resistant.
      •   Austenitic  steel  is most common but  is susceptible  to stress corrosion  in high  salt
          environments.
      •   Chrome/nickel steels tend to gall, causing thread damage.

     As described above, the number of non-magnetic drill collars and the position of the sensor
     /compass within the non-magnetic collars will depend on the borehole inclination, azimuth and
      geographical location. Charts are available from most of the surveying contractors that indicate
      the number of non-magnetic  drill collars required at different inclinations and azimuths in
       different geographical locations.

       Alternatively the survey data obtained can be corrected for drill string magnetic interference by
      using one of a number of commercially available software packages.

3.0  Methods of Survey Calculations

    A directional survey tool measures inclination and azimuth at a number of survey stations at
      specified measured depths. These values are used to calculate the North and East co-ordinates
     and the true vertical depth within the specified reference system. Dogleg severity and vertical
      section (horizontal displacement) can also be calculated.
     There are several methods of calculating the three dimensional location of a survey station.
     These methods are listed below in the order of increasing accuracy:
      •   Tangential method
      •  Average angle method
      •   Radius of curvature method
      •  Minimum curvature method


3.1  Tangential Method
      This was the earliest used survey method. Calculations are based on the drift angle (inclination)
     and direction of  drift angle (azimuth) at the lower of two survey points. The course length
      (distance between two survey points) is taken to be a straight line. This line is assumed to have
      the same drift angle and direction of drift angle as the lower survey point. The compound errors
      with this method can become very significant and hence the method is inaccurate.

      For two given survey stations, S1 and S2, where the measured depth, MD1 and MD2, the
       inclination, I1 and I2, and the azimuth, A1 and A2, are known, then the North, East and TVD can
     be calculated at S2 as follows

      North2   = North1 + [(MD2 – MD1) x sin I2 x cos A2]
      East2   = East1 + [(MD2 – MD1) x sin I2 x sin A2]
     TVD2   = TVD1 + [(MD2 – MD1) x cos I2]

     Example

      Measured   Inclination   Azimuth     North       East     TVD
        Depth
          0         0         0         0         0         0

                                   Page 19 of 36                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 206 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

         500        1       N28E       7.70        4.10      499.92
         750         1.5      N10E      14.15       5.23      749.84
        1000        2       N35E      21.30      10.24      999.69
        1250        4       N25E      37.10      17.61     1249.08
        1500        8       N30E      67.23      35.00     1496.64
        1750       12      N35E      109.81      64.82     1741.18
        2000       15      N40E      159.38     106.41     1982.66
        2250       17      N43E      212.83     156.26     2221.74
        2500       18      N40E      272.02     205.92     2459.50
        2750       19      N37E      337.02     254.90     2695.88
        3000       20      N38E      404.40     307.54     2930.81

3.2  Average Angle Method
      This method uses the average  drift angle (inclination) and average direction of  drift angle
      (azimuth) between two survey points. This significantly reduces the errors generated using the
      previous method and assumes that the course length lies in a straight line between survey
       points. The Dogleg between two survey points is assumed to be small.  If the distance between
      the two points is small, then the straight line path assumed approximates very closely with the
       original wellbore.

          It is simple to hand calculate in the field. For two given survey stations, S1 and S2, where the
     measured depth, MD1 and MD2, the inclination, I1 and I2, and the azimuth, A1 and A2, are known,
      then the North, East and TVD can be calculated at S2 as follows

                                                I1 + I 2         A 1 + A 2       North 2 = North1 +  (MD 2 - MD 1 ) × sin         × cos                                                                                        2             2     
                                              I1 + I 2        A 1 + A 2       East 2 = East 1 +  (MD 2 - MD1 ) × sin         × sin                                                                                   2            2     
                                               I1 + I2      TVD 2 = TVD 1 +  (MD 2 - MD1 ) × cos                                                                                  2    
     Example

      Measured   Inclination   Azimuth     North       East     TVD
        Depth
          0         0         0         0         0         0
         500        1       N28E       4.23        1.06      499.98
         750         1.5      N10E       9.39        2.83      749.92
        1000        2       N35E      16.44       5.75      999.80
        1250        4       N25E      27.77      12.29     1249.46
        1500        8       N30E      50.95      24.36     1498.09
        1750       12      N35E      87.57      47.69     1744.29
        2000       15      N40E      133.87      83.21     1987.39
        2250       17      N43E      185.48     128.88     2227.70
        2500       18      N40E      241.78     178.69     2466.13
        2750       19      N37E      303.86     228.07     2703.21
        3000       20      N38E      370.07     278.87     2938.87

3.3  Radius of Curvature Method
      This method assumes that the borehole is a smooth arc between surveys. Requires some
     complex calculations which are best suited to a programmable calculator or computer. The
       calculation method is unaffected by long course lengths.  It assumes wellpath has a constant
      radius of curvature.


                                   Page 20 of 36                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 207 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      For two given survey stations, S1 and S2, where the measured depth, MD1 and MD2, the
       inclination, I1 and I2, and the azimuth, A1 and A2, are known, then the North, East and TVD can
     be calculated at S2 as follows
                            (MD 2 - MD1 ) × (cos I1 - cos I 2 ) × (sin A 2 - sin A 1 ) 
     North 2 = North1 +                     (I 2 - I1 ) × (A 2 - A 1 )                                 
                          (MD 2 - MD1 ) × (cos I1 - Cos I 2 ) × (cos A 1 - cos A 2 ) 
     East 2 = East 1 +                       (I 2 - I1 ) × ( A 2 - A 1 )                                    
                              [(MD 2 - MD1 ) × (sin I 2 - sin I1 )]    TVD 2 = TVD 1 +                                              (I 2 - I1 )

     Example
      Measured   Inclination   Azimuth     North       East     TVD
        Depth
          0         0         0         0         0         0
         500        1       N28E       4.19        1.05      499.97
         750         1.5      N10E       9.33        2.81      749.91
        1000        2       N35E      16.32       5.71      999.80
        1250        4       N25E      27.64      12.25     1249.44
        1500        8       N30E      50.81      24.31     1498.02
        1750       12      N35E      87.40      47.62     1744.17
        2000       15      N40E      133.68      83.13     1987.24
        2250       17      N43E      185.29     128.78     2227.54
        2500       18      N40E      241.58     178.59     2465.97
        2750       19      N37E      303.66     227.97     2703.05
        3000       20      N38E      369.86     278.77     2938.70

3.4  Minimum Curvature Method
      This method takes the inclination and azimuth information from each survey point and creates a
     smooth curve. This is a complex method not suitable for hand calculations. This method is
      widely used by operators and directional drilling companies.
      For two given survey stations, S1 and S2, where the measured depth, MD1 and MD2, the
       inclination, I1 and I2, and the azimuth, A1 and A2, are known, then the North, East and TVD can
     be calculated at S2 as follows

                            MD 2 - MD1                                                 North 2 = North1 +                × ((sin I1 cos A 1 ) + (sin I2 cos A 2 )) × RF                                                          2                                                                                           
                          MD 2 - MD1                                               East 2 = East 1 +                × ((sin I1 sin A 1 ) + (sin I2 sin A 2 )) × RF                                                      2                                                                                        
                          MD 2 - MD1                              TVD 2 = TVD 1 +                × (cos I1 + cos I2 ) × RF                                                       2                                                       

     where
     cos DL = cos (I 2 - I1 ) - (sin I1 × sin I 2 × (1 - cos ( A 2 - A 1 )))
         180   2     DL
    RF =    ×   × tan           If DL = 0, RF = 1
          π  DL     2

     and
                         DL               o    Dog Leg Severity (DLS) =          × 100 (  / 100 ft )
                  MD 2 - MD1



                                   Page 21 of 36                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 208 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


     Example
      Measured   Inclination   Azimuth     North       East     TVD      DLS
        Depth                                                                  deg/100ft
          0         0         0         0         0         0
         500        1       N28E       3.85        2.05      499.97       0.20
         750         1.5      N10E       9.00        3.64      749.92       0.25
        1000        2       N35E      15.80       6.71      999.80       0.36
        1250        4       N25E      27.27      12.90     1249.45      0.82
        1500        8       N30E      50.25      25.29     1498.03      1.61
        1750       12      N35E      86.62      48.90     1744.19      1.64
        2000       15      N40E      132.71      84.61     1987.26      1.29
        2250       17      N43E      184.23     130.34     2227.57      0.87
        2500       18      N40E      240.55     180.10     2466.00      0.54
        2750       19      N37E      302.64     229.42     2703.08      0.55
        3000       20      N38E      368.83     280.23     2938.74      0.42


3.5  Survey Uncertainty
      Survey uncertainty is the 3D range that the actual position of a survey station may be in
     compared to its calculated position.  It is the result of combining the uncertainties of  all the
       individual data measurements for the survey. The magnitude of the uncertainty is determined by
      the tool type, quality and uncertainty model of the survey tool combined with the uncertainties of
      the technique used to run the tool and the environment in which it is run.

      Uncertainties occur due to:
      •   statistical uncertainties in the sensor readings from which inclination and azimuth values are
          derived
      •   systematic uncertainties, such as due to variations in calibration of linearity, sensitivity, bias
        and drift.

      For normal borehole surveys, which have a significant length and significant number of survey
       stations, the systematic uncertainty will dominate the statistical uncertainty. Therefore, Wolff and
     de Wardt in 1981 introduced a systematic tool error model. This approach to calculation of the
      borehole position uncertainty has become the industry standard.

     The effect of these differences is an uncertainty in the measured positions, resulting in an
      uncertainty around the calculated borehole position. Typically, the uncertainty in the lateral
       direction is larger than the uncertainties in upward and measured depth. Consequently, the
       resulting uncertainty at a survey station has an ellipsoidal shape. The uncertainty accumulates
      along the well trajectory, and will be largest at the last survey station.

     The FINDS tool (Ferranti Inertial Directional Tool) was the most accurate survey tooled used to
      date at 0.5ft in any direction. However, its size (10.625”) effectively restricted it to 13.375” casing
      runs.  Current wireline gyros are accurate to 1.5°  / 1000ft up to 60° rising to 3°  / 1000ft in
       horizontal sections. The accuracy of MWD tools is quoted in degrees variation for the following:
         Inclination      0.1 – 0.25°
       Azimuth        1.0 – 1.5°
       Tool face       1.5 – 3.0°
       In holes less than 5°, accuracy diminishes and an alternative system should be used.

4.0  Directional Drilling

4.1 Why Directionally Drill?
       Directional  drilling  is the science of directing a wellbore along a pre-determined path to a
      designated sub-surface target.



                                   Page 22 of 36                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 209 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

     The most common applications of directional drilling are:
      •   Drilling multiple wells from offshore structures
      •   Controlling inclination in vertical wells
      •   Sidetracking
      •   Drilling relief wells
      •   Drilling horizontal or multi-lateral wells to expose more producing formation

4.2  Deflection Techniques
     The main techniques for deflecting a well are:
      •  Whipstocks
      •   Jetting
      •   Rotary drilling
      •   Motors

4.2.1 Whipstocks
      This was the main method of deflecting a well from 1930 – 1950.  It was superceded by the
       introduction of mud motors. It has recently seen a revival due to multilateral and re-entry drilling.
     There are two variants of this tool, the retrievable and the permanent whipstock. Both provide a
     means of orienting a steel, concave wedge, which is used to deflect the drillstring. Depending
     upon the style of whipstock used, the number of trips to initiate a deflected wellbore can be a
       single trip to multiple trips. A lot depends upon how the whipstock is set and oriented in the hole
     and how the starting mills perform.

4.2.2 Jetting
       Jetting can be used to steer in soft formations and is typically used in top hole. The assembly
      consists of a modified tricone bit with either one jet significantly larger than the other two or with
     one open and two blanked jets. Essentially, the bit is oriented and washed down at maximum
     pump rate for 5 – 10ft, rotary drilled for the remainder of the single and then a survey is taken
      with a surface read-out gyro. This procedure can be repeated until the desired angle and
       deflection is obtained. This technique can be used to build angles up to 15° and create doglegs
       of 3° / 100ft.

       Jetting is economic in enabling a hole to be drilled quickly without having to resort to assembly
      changes.  It enables a  full gauge hole to be drilled with gentle changes in direction in soft
      formations with reduced rotating hours and provides a useful means of steering safely through a
      top hole where there are numerous conductors from adjacent wells.

4.2.3 Rotary Drilling
       Historically, it has always been possible to control the inclination of directional wells during rotary
        drilling by correct assembly design and the use of appropriate drilling parameters. Azimuth
       control, however, has always been difficult.

     The factors affecting the behaviour of rotary assemblies will be discussed later.

4.2.4 Motors
      Motors (either positive displacement motors or turbines), equipped with a bent sub or bent
      housing, allow the bit to be orientated and drilled in a preferred direction without any drill string
       rotation. This allows full control over azimuth and inclination.
      Other factors affecting the behaviour of these steerable systems will be discussed later.

4.3  Directional Control with Rotary Systems
       Directional trends are related to the direction of the resultant force at the bit. In this respect, bit
            tilt angle (angle between bit axis and hole axis) is believed to be influential. This is because a



                                   Page 23 of 36                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 210 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

         drill bit is designed to drill parallel to its axis. In rotary assemblies with a near bit stabiliser, the bit
            tilt angle is small and the magnitude of the side force is the key factor.
      Trajectory is affected by the following parameters:
      •  Gauge and placement of stabilisers
      •   Diameter and length of drill collars
      •  Weight on bit
      •   Rotary speed
      •   Bit type
      •   Formation anisotropy (properties vary horizontally/vertically) and dip angle of the bedding
          planes
      •   Formation hardness
      •  Flow rate
      •  Rate of penetration

4.3.1 Gauge and Placement of Stabilisers
     The gauge and placement of stabilisers, combined with drilling parameters, has a marked effect
     on the ability of a rotary assembly to build, drop or hold inclination. There are three fundamental
       principles:
      •   Fulcrum principle
      •   Stabilisation principle
      •  Pendulum principle

4.3.1.1 Fulcrum Principle
     An assembly with a full gauge near bit stabiliser and 40 ft – 120 ft of drill collars before the next
       stabiliser will build angle when weight is applied. Applying weight will cause the drill collars to flex
     and the near bit stabiliser to become a fulcrum or pivot point. This creates an opposing force at
      the bit (see Fig 15) which creates an upwards curving hole until bit weight is reduced.





                                         Hole gauge
                                                                       Side force
                                                                                     at stabiliser


                                 Side force
                                        at bit

                             Resultant force
                                 at bit
                                                                         Formation
                                                 Hole axis              anisotropy

                                                                Bit tilt angle

                          Fig 15 Fulcrum principle





                                   Page 24 of 36                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 211 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

     The build rate is increased by:
      •  An increase in distance between near bit and first string stabiliser - this is the most important
         design element in a fulcrum assembly for building angle. As this distance is increased, the
          capacity to build angle increases due to the greater leverage exerted at the pivot point (near
             bit stabiliser). Once the first string stabiliser is about 120’ above the near bit no further effect
              will be felt since the collars will be contacting the wellbore.
      •   Increase in hole inclination - as this increases, the drill collars have a greater component at
            right angles to the hole axis and hence exert a greater force about the fulcrum.
      •   Reduction of drill collar diameter - the stiffness of a drill collar is proportional to the fourth
         power of the diameter. Thus, using a slightly smaller collar will greatly increase the flexibility
           of an assembly. A smaller collar will also increase the annular distance and allow the collar
           to flex further before contacting the wellbore.
      •   Increase in weight on bit - as this increases, it bends the collars between the two stabilisers,
         which increases the side force at the bit.
      •   Reduction in rotary speed  - a higher rotary speed  will tend to straighten the drillstring.
         Hence, low speeds (70 – 100 RPM) tend to be used with these assemblies
      •   Reduction in flow rate - in soft formations, a high pump rate can wash out the hole ahead
        and reduce build rates.

4.3.1.2 Stabilisation Principle
     The principle used is that three or more full gauge stabilisers each separated by a stiff collar
       including the near bit one will resist any bending effects and will prefer to follow a straight
       trajectory. These assemblies are termed packed assemblies and are typically used on tangent
      sections in conjunction with high rotary speeds (120 – 160 RPM).

4.3.1.3 Pendulum Principle
      This was the first directional principle developed and comprises either no near bit stabiliser or
     one that is under-gauge. The bit experiences a low side force due to gravity. Reducing the
      weight on bit and reaming each stand to help in bedding it in can increase the effect. If the bit to
         first string stabiliser is too great, then the collars may contact the wall reducing the effectiveness
     and could turn the bit to the high side. Maintaining a high rotary (120 – 160 RPM+) plus low
      weight on bit initially will help to initiate a drop. Once the trajectory has been started, more weight
     can be introduced to speed up the process.

      Guidelines:
      •  The sections between the bit and first string stabiliser and first and second string stabiliser
          should be as stiff as possible.
      •  No near bit stabiliser required with a PDC bit or when no azimuth problems. Using a tri-cone
              bit, insert an under-gauge stabiliser (¼” or ½”).
      •  There should be two string stabilisers with no more than 30ft between them.
      •  Use a low bit weight  initially until a dropping tendency has been established and then
          increase gradually.
      •  Use high rotary speed (dependent on bit type).

4.3.1.4 Variable Gauge Stabilisers
     These tools enable a rotary assembly to behave in a manner dependent on the stabiliser gauge
      status i.e. whether full or under gauge.

     The Andergauge tool comprises a stabiliser with adjustable blades created by cam activated
       cylinders, which can be extended or withdrawn to vary the gauge of the tool. This is effected by
       setting down weight on the bit with the pumps off to lock the pistons in place and then repeating
      the procedure to retract the pistons i.e. under-gauge status. If appropriately located in a bottom
      hole assembly, then the assembly can be made to behave according to the gauge setting and as
      discussed above for traditional rotary assemblies.

     The adjustable blades on the Sperry-Sun AGS™ adjustable stabiliser also comprise several
     rows of cylinders that can be extended and retracted by using a “pumps on/ pumps  off”

                                   Page 25 of 36                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 212 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      procedure. This cycling of the pumps allows the cylinders to fully retract each time and then
       settle in alternating gauge and under-gauge positions. The tool position can be easily monitored
     by observing the stand pipe pressure (Fig 16) as there is a 150-250psi pressure differential
     between positions.



          DRLG STROKES/FLOW..........SYSTEM PRESSURE........
                                                                                  SYSTEM PRESSURE
              PISTONS EXTENDED                                                         PLUS SIGNAL





              PISTONS FLUSH                                                       NO SIGNAL





           PISTONS                                                                        ZERO
          AT REST                                                                         PRESSURE
                     CYCLE 1             CYCLE 2           CYCLE 1            CYCLE 2

               Fig 16 AGS Status Diagram


4.3.2 Diameter of Drill Collars
        Drill collars add stiffness as well as weight to a drilling assembly and can be likened to thick
      walled cylinders for modelling purposes. Their stiffness depends on their axial moment of inertia
     and modulus of elasticity (see Section 8 Drill String Design).

      With a fulcrum type assembly, reducing collar OD will increase the build tendency because the
       collars are more flexible and they can flex further before contacting the wellbore. Once this
       situation occurs, increasing the weight on bit will have little added effect.

      With a packed type assembly, reducing collar OD may create a slight build tendency as the
       collars are more flexible.

      With a pendulum type assembly this should be as stiff as possible and so the largest collars
      practicable should be used. Reducing collar OD will increase the annular clearance (distance
      from collar to borehole wall) which will enable the collars to bend further towards the low side
      before making contact. This will reduce the drop rate as it turns the bit towards high side. Using
      smaller OD collars also reduces the BHA weight and hence reduces the pendulum effect due to
       gravity.

4.3.3 Bit Type
       Roller cone bits have no effect on whether an assembly will build, hold or drop angle. They do,
      however, have an impact on azimuth and  will tend  to “walk” to the  right. This effect  is
     emphasised  with  long-toothed  rock  bits  in  soft  formations,  partly due  to  the enhanced
      penetration rate and partly due to the greater cone offset. Conversely, short toothed bits in hard
      formations will have a much lesser tendency to walk to the right.

    PDC bits using low weight on bit and high rotary speeds has been shown to produce little “walk”
      tendency. However, they do have an effect on hole angle. A short gauge bit will have a greater
      impact on hole angle adjustment than a long gauge bit, which will have a tendency to maintain


                                   Page 26 of 36                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 213 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

       trajectory. The gauge of the bit acts as a stabiliser and the longer the gauge, the greater the
       stabiliser effect.

4.3.4 Formation Anisotropy
      Formation anisotropy (the variation in formation properties along different directions in the rock)
     does  certainly  effect  directional  response. Most  oilfield  drilling has been conducted  in
      sedimentary rocks which, by definition, were usually deposited  in layers and thus exhibit
      anisotropy e.g. bedding planes, graded bedding, fine inter-bedding. Drilling experience has
      demonstrated that the bit will be deflected in a manner dependent on the incident angle of the bit
      with the dipping beds and different theories have been propounded to describe the reaction of a
         drill bit under these conditions. The “preferential chip formation theory” suggests that a bit tooth
      generates compressive stresses perpendicular to the tooth face and that shear failure will occur
     more readily along the bedding planes. Thus chip size will vary around a tooth depending on
      tooth/bedding plane angle. As depicted in Fig 17, the bit is preferentially directed towards the
      area of maximum chip removal by the resultant deviation force ( Fd ) and the following graph,
      derived experimentally, can be used as a guide to indicate deflection tendencies.

     These unwanted deflection trends can be reduced through the use of packed assemblies. A full
      gauge, near-bit stabiliser will reduce bit walk whilst more serious deflection trends might require
      counter trends being designed into the drilling assembly beforehand.





                                                  UNEQUAL chip volumes
               Bedding
                plane


                                                        Fd




                Fig 17 Preferential chip formation





                                   Page 27 of 36                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 214 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
               DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE





             5000

                                                               1000
            dip
        Up

             2500
      (N)                                                         500           (LBF)
           force
                                                                                                                                                                             force
             0                                                 0
                         15     30     45     60     75                   Deviation    Fd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Deviation
                                                               500    Fd
           dip   2500
               Down
                                                               1000
             5000


           Fig 18 Maximum deviation force as a function of formation dip





                                                              Up dip


Effective angle of dip





     Down dip

                Fig 19 Meaning of up dip and down dip





                              Page 28 of 36                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 215 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE





                                           30°


                                                         Hole inclinat ion    =     30°
                                                                                35°        Real dip angle    =     35°
                                                                                  Ef fective dip angle  =     30° + 35° = 65°
                                                                There will be a down dip deviation force





                                                         Hole inclinat ion    =    0°
                                                                             3 5°          Effective angle of dip equals real dip angle (35°)
                                                                There will be an up dip deviation force                       Bedding
                                                       plane





                                          35°



                                                         Hole inclinat ion    =     35°
                                                            Real dip angle    =     35°
                                                                                  Ef fective dip angle  =    90
                                                           There will be no deviation force



                Fig 20 Deviation responses to various angles of dip

4.3.5 Formation Hardness
      Very soft formations may be washed away by the mere jetting action of circulating mud. Under
      these conditions, it can prove difficult to build any angle. If anticipated, the bit can be equipped
      with large nozzles to reduce nozzle velocity. Reduced pump rates can be used except just prior
       to connections when they should be raised just to ensure that the bit/BHA are not fouled with
       settled cuttings during the connection. Excessive washing can produce a dropping effect even
      with a fairly stiff packed assembly.

       In harder formations, BHA’s behave more predictably due to the hole being more usually in
     gauge and able to take some contact force enabling the drill collars to flex and create bit  tilt
      angle. The major problem in hard formations is getting an assembly to drop. Reduced weight on
        bit might be required to maximise the drop rate but this conflicts with perhaps an increased
      weight on bit to achieve a reasonable penetration rate.

4.4  Directional Control with Downhole Motors
     There are two distinctive classes of motor – turbines and positive displacement motors (PDM’s).
     They offer the following advantages regarding direct provision of motive power to the bit rather
      than transmitting it from the surface.
      •   Elimination of lateral vibration
      •   String and casing wear reduced
      •  Lower torque in string, especially in deviated holes
      •  Reduced fatigue loads on drill pipe
      •  Can be run with light weight at continuous speeds
      •  The ability to orient and drill ahead.





                                  Page 29 of 36                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 216 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

4.4.1 Turbines
      Turbine development began in about 1924 in both The USSR and USA. The development has
      continued in Russia up to the present to the extent that these are the norm for drilling directional
      wells there. This situation will have been helped by the lack of sufficient quantity of fatigue
       resistant pipe for rotary drilling.

      Elsewhere, PDM’s have superseded the turbine as the premier directional motor whilst turbines
      are used more selectively.
      •   Turbines can only be powered by a liquid drilling fluid
      •  A turbine consists of blades and stators mounted at right angles to fluid flow
      •  The rotors are attached to the drive shaft whilst the stators are attached to the outer casing
      •  Each rotor / stator pair are known as a stage
      •   Typical turbines are equipped with 75 – 250 stages.
      •  The stators direct the fluid flow onto the rotors driving the shaft clockwise
      •  The power of a turbodrill is proportional to the number of stages
      •  Power output from any stage is dependent on the number of blades, blade spacing, blade
          angle, blade shape and flow area.
      •   Side-tracking turbines are short units (30ft) whilst straight hole turbines are much longer and
         comprise several sections – circulating sub, top motor section, 1 – 2 power sections, a
          bearing section and a drive shaft section incorporating the near bit stabiliser.
      •   Turbines are high speed devices (500 – 1000 RPM). As they have an open fluid path,
          applying excessive weight will cause stalling.
      •   Turbines usually operate best in hard to medium hard formations where high speeds and
         low weight on bit provide the optimum drilling parameters.
      •   For hard abrasive formations, turbines used to be run with diamond bits. Nowadays, with the
         advent of PDC bits, these would tend to be used instead.
      •  The continued development of Positive Displacement Motor/bit combinations has led to
          these largely replacing turbines since the late 1980’s.

      Typical Turbine Specifications - Drilex

       OD      Stages     Flow     Flow    Speed    Torque    Power     Hydraulic    Pressue    Length
            Ins            Gpm          Rpm       Ft-lbs     HP      Thrust Lbs   Drop psi       Ft
                                                   Nominal performance with 10ppg mud
          Straight hole tools
           5        150     100-200    150      975       375       70       10.480      1,095      34
            7, 7¼      150     375-500    425      910      1410      244       26,345      1,430      38
        7¼       120     250-500    475     1,010      1,430      275       25,574      1,450      47
          Directional tools
           5        90      150-250    150      975       225       42        6,298       656       22
            7, 7¼      70      375-500    425      910       660       115       12,380      670       21
            7, 7¼      100     375-500    475     1,010      1,192      229       21,312      1,208      28

4.4.2 Positive Displacement Motors
      •  The original PDM concepts were developed in 1956 based on the Moineau pump principle in
          reverse i.e. the fluid flow drives the pump shaft.
      •  The pump can be powered by drilling fluid, air or gas and comprises four major sections:
           1. Dump valve – a by-pass valve allowing the drillstring to fill or empty when tripping.
           2.  Motor assembly – comprises a rubber-lined stator with a spirally shaped cavity of
                  elliptical cross section and a spiral, solid steel shaft rotor running throughout the length
                of the cavity. The top end is free while the lower end is fixed to a connecting rod.
           3.  Connecting rod – equipped with a universal joint at each end to accommodate the
               eccentric rotation of the rotor and transfer this rotation to the drive shaft.
           4.  Bearing and drive shaft assembly – consists of thrust bearings and a radial bearing to
              allow smooth rotation of the drive shaft. The bearings are lubricated by the mud. The
               drive shaft is then connected to a bit sub which is the only external rotating part of the
          mud motor.
      •   The motor is designed such that the rotor is forced to turn clockwise when drilling fluid is
        pumped through the motor into the cavities between the rotor and stator.


                                  Page 30 of 36                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 217 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      •   Motors are defined by the ratio of the number of lobes in section of rotor to stator. There is
          always one more stator lobe and these can vary from 2 to 11 for stator lobes with
          corresponding 1 to 10 rotor lobes.
      •   The torque produced by PDM’s is proportional to the pressure differential across the motor.
       When weight on bit is applied, the circulating pressure must increase. As the bit drills off,
           the pressure decreases. Thus, the pump pressure can be used as both a bit weight and
           torque indicator.

4.4.3 Bit Tilt
       Directional control with downhole motors is based on tilting the axis of the bit with respect to the
      axis of the hole and / or creating a side force at the bit. If the drill string and hence the body of
      the motor is rotated from surface then the bit will tend to drill straight ahead. However, if the drill
       string is not rotated, then the bit will drill a curved path determined by the orientation of the side
      force or the tilt of the bit axis.

     The tilt of the axis of the bit is caused either by incorporating a bent sub above the motor or by
      using a motor with an adjustable bent housing. The  tilt angle is dependant on the directional
      requirements.
      •  A high  tilt angle is recommended for kicking off and side-tracking.  It should produce a
          greater dog-leg than that programmed to enable a portion of the drilling to be completed in
           rotary mode which should produce a higher penetration rate. Thus, in a typical deviated
           section, a single will be drilled by oriented sliding for the initial 10ft and the remaining 20ft
            drilled in rotary mode. As a rule of thumb, the tilt angle selected should produce a dog-leg of
          1.25 times the maximum dog-leg severity required by the well plan.
      •   With a choice available, a tool with a higher dogleg capability should be selected as this will
         enable a greater portion of the drilling to be completed in rotary mode.
      •  When tangent or straight hole drilling, a lower tilt angle is recommended to reduce bit wear.

4.4.3.1 Bent Sub
      This is a short length of drill collar-sized pipe placed directly above the motor, with its lower
      section offset from the vertical. The amount of offset varies with from 1 to 3 degrees being
     common. The inside of the bend is scribed to indicate the direction in which the bit will drill (tool
      face) and an orienting tool (MWD tool) is usually positioned above the bent sub. This type of
     assembly offers control over direction, smoother deviation and can be used to build or drop
      angle.

4.4.3.2 Adjustable Bent Housing
     An adjustable bent element is positioned in the motor housing which also holds the flexible
      coupling  / connecting rod. This places  it below the motor assembly and nearer the bit, giving
      greater directional control (Fig 21). The angle of the bent housing ranges in increments from 0 to
     3 degrees and is easily reset at site.





                                  Page 31 of 36                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 218 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE





                                                             First String Stabiliser





                                    Dump Valve





                                              Motor Assembly




                                                   Adjustable Bent Housing





                                                  Motor Stabiliser





                                                                     Bit


                  Fig 21 Steerable System - Motor/Bent Housing

4.4.4 Reactive Torque
      Reactive torque is the tendency for the drillstring to turn in the opposite direction from the bit. As
      the rotor turns to the right, the stator is subjected to a left-turning force. Depending on the type of
      formation and length of drillstring, the pipe will twist causing the bit to drill to the left. This left
     hand torque increases as more weight on bit and pump pressure are applied. Local experience
     can be used to counter this effect by adjusting the bent sub orientation.

4.4.5 Stabiliser Size and Placement
     Most bent housing / motor combinations can be used:
      •   Fully stabilised system with bearing and top (first string) stabilisers
      •   Partially stabilised system with bearing housing stabiliser only
      •   Slick system i.e. no stabilisation
     The degree of stabilisation is determined by the desired directional response.

     The dogleg severity that can be generated is a function of
      •   the tilt angle (as discussed above)
      •   the size of the motor stabiliser and the first string stabiliser above the bit
      •   the distances between the bit, motor stabiliser and first string stabiliser (this is a combination
           of the fulcrum and stabilisation principle for rotary assemblies).

4.4.5.1 Motor Stabiliser
     The motor centraliser centralises the bit and motor in the hole.


                                  Page 32 of 36                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 219 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      •   Is usually a screw-on or clamp-on design
      •   Is always undergauge
      •   Typically, 1/8” undergauge for hole sizes up to 17½” and ¼” for larger hole sizes.
      •  Gauge length should not exceed bit gauge length

4.4.5.2 First String Stabiliser

      This is normally run either directly above the motor or with a pony drill collar in between.
      •     It should be no bigger than the motor stabiliser and be of a similar design.
      •  The build or drop capacity of the BHA is increased as the degree undergauge of the first
           string stabiliser increases.
      •   With long motors (which have a build tendency in rotary), the first string stabiliser should
         always have the same gauge as the bearing housing stabiliser.
      •   With standard length motors, an undergauge first string stabiliser is required to produce a
          holding tendency in rotary.

     To hold in rotary mode, use the following guide:

                   Hole size                   First string stabiliser gauge
                        8-1/2”                          8” to 8-3/8”
                        9-7/8”                         9-1/8” to 9-5/8”
                      12-1/4”                        11-3/4” to 12”
                      14-3/4”                      14-1/8” to 14-1/2”
                      17-1/2”                        16” to 17”

     To build at 0.25°/100ft in rotary mode, use the following guide:

                        8-1/2”                               1/8”
                      12-1/4”                       ¼”
                      17-1/2”                              3/8”

      Note: The above does not apply to long motors.
      Note: The above should be used as a guide only. Actual results can be affected by the
      formations drilled and will vary from region to region.

4.4.5.3 Variable Gauge Stabilisers
      Variable gauge stabilisers are often run as the first string stabiliser to give a greater degree of
       control when drilling in rotary mode. A number of manufacturers are also designing variable
     gauge motor housing stabilisers.

4.4.6 Amount of Slide Drilling
     An estimate of the proportion of slide drilling that will be required can be determined by the
       following equation:
                                         (DL - DLR )   % Footage in Sliding =            x 100                                       (DLO - DLR )

     Where        DL    = required dogleg
                DLO   = actual dogleg when oriented
                DLR   = actual dogleg when rotary drilling

          It must be remembered that sliding is detrimental to hole cleaning, especially on long tangent
      sections at relatively high angle. So a balance must be struck between hole cleaning and the
     amount or slide drilling.




                                  Page 33 of 36                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 220 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

5.0  Typical Bottom Hole Assemblies

5.1  Rotary Assemblies

5.1.1 BHA for Holding
     Depending upon formation characteristics, WOB, RPM, bit type, etc. the following assembly will
      generally hold or show a slight build or drop tendency at 0.1 – 0.5 °/100ft.

       Bit
       Full Gauge Near Bit Stabiliser
      Short Drill Collar
       Full Gauge String Stabiliser
        Drill Collar
       Full Gauge String Stabiliser
        Drill Collars as required for WOB
      Jar
        Drill Collars as required to operate jar
    HWDP as required

5.1.2 BHA for Building
     Depending upon formation characteristics, WOB, RPM, bit type, etc. the following assembly will
      generally build at 1.5 – 2.5 °/100ft

       Bit
       Full Gauge Near Bit Stabiliser
     2 x Drill Collars
       Full Gauge String Stabiliser
        Drill Collar
       Full Gauge String Stabiliser
        Drill Collars as required for WOB
      Jar
        Drill Collars as required to operate jar
    HWDP as required

      This assembly is often referred to as a 60ft Building Assembly. Increasing the spacing between
      the near bit and the first stabiliser will increase the build rate. Decreasing the spacing between
      the near bit and the first stabiliser will decrease the build rate.

5.1.3 BHA for Dropping
     Depending upon formation characteristics, WOB, RPM, bit type, etc. the following assembly will
      generally drop at 1.5 – 2.0 °/100ft

       Bit
        Drill Collar
       Full Gauge String Stabiliser
        Drill Collar
       Full Gauge String Stabiliser
        Drill Collars as required for WOB
      Jar
        Drill Collars as required to operate jar
    HWDP as required
      This assembly  is often referred to as a 30ft Pendulum Assembly. Increasing the spacing
     between the  bit and the  first stabiliser  will increase the drop rate. Decreasing the spacing
     between the bit and first stabiliser will decrease the drop rate.

    A 60ft Pendulum Assembly is sometimes used to drill vertical wells through soft to medium hard
      formations, although care must be taken with how much WOB is applied, because this could
       easily become a building assembly.


                                  Page 34 of 36                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 221 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

5.2  Steerable Assemblies

5.2.1 BHA for 17½” Hole – Holding Tendency in Rotary

     17½” rock bit
     11¼” steerable motor with 17¼” motor stabiliser
     16½” first string stabiliser
      Float sub
     9½” NMDC
     9½” MWD
     16½” NM stabiliser
     2 x 9½” NMDC
      Crossover
     2 x 8” steel DC’s (increase or decrease if required)
      Jars
      8” steel DC
      Crossover
    HWDP (sufficient to provide weight on bit)

5.2.2 BHA for 17½” Hole – Build Tendency in Rotary

     17½” PDC bit
     11¼” steerable motor with 17¼” motor stabiliser
     17¼” first string stabiliser
      Float sub
     9½” NMDC
     9½” MWD
     16½” NM stabiliser
     2 x 9½” NMDC
      Crossover
     2 x 8” steel DC’s (increase or decrease if required)
      Jars
      8” steel DC
      Crossover
    HWDP (sufficient to provide weight on bit)

5.2.3 BHA for 12¼” Hole – Holding Tendency in Rotary

     12¼” bit
     9½” steerable motor with 12-1/8” motor stabiliser
      12” first string stabiliser
      8” NMDC
      8” MWD
      12” NM stabiliser
     2 x 8” NMDC
      Jars
      8” steel DC
      Crossover
    HWDP (sufficient to provide weight on bit)

5.2.4 BHA for 12¼” Hole – Building Tendency in Rotary

     12¼” bit
     9½” steerable motor with 12-1/8” motor stabiliser
      11” first string stabiliser
      8” NMDC
      8” MWD
     11¾” NM stabiliser


                                  Page 35 of 36                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 222 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

     2 x 8” NMDC
      Jars
      8” steel DC
      Crossover
    HWDP (sufficient to provide weight on bit)


5.3  Rotary Steerable Assemblies

      Rotary steerable assemblies, which allow inclination and azimuth control whilst rotary drilling, will
     be discussed in Section 13 – Advances In Technology.





                                  Page 36 of 36                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 223 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

                  SECTION 10
            FORMATION EVALUATION


     Contents
1.0    Introduction                                                                 2
  1.1 Mud Logging                                                                2
  1.2  Coring                                                                      2
  1.3 Log Analysis                                                                 2
  1.4 Log Types                                                                  3
  1.5 Mud Invasion                                                                3
2.0    Reservoir Definition                                                           3
  2.1  Porosity                                                                    3
  2.2  Permeability                                                                 4
  2.3  Fluid Saturation                                                              4
3.0   Log Presentation                                                             4
4.0    Wireline Logs                                                                4
  4.1  Caliper                                                                     4
     4.1.1   Principle                                                                4
     4.1.2  Log Presentation                                                         4
     4.1.3  Application                                                              5
  4.2 Gamma Ray                                                                 5
     4.2.1   Principle                                                                5
     4.2.2  Log Presentation                                                         5
     4.2.3  Application                                                              6
     4.2.4   Limitations                                                              6
  4.3  Density Log                                                                 6
     4.3.1   Principle                                                                6
     4.3.2  Log Presentation                                                         6
     4.3.3  Application                                                              6
     4.3.4   Limitations                                                              7
  4.4  Neutron Log                                                                 7
     4.4.1   Principle                                                                7
     4.4.2  Log Presentation                                                         7
     4.4.3  Application                                                              7
     4.4.4   Limitations                                                              7
  4.5  Sonic Log                                                                   7
     4.5.1   Principle                                                                7
     4.5.2  Log Presentation                                                         8
     4.5.3  Application                                                              8
  4.6  Resistivity Log                                                               8
     4.6.1   Principle                                                                8
     4.6.2  Log Presentation                                                         8
     4.6.3  Application                                                              8
  4.7  Formation Tester                                                             9
5.0    Pipe Conveyed Logging                                                        9
6.0   LWD                                                                      10
  6.1  Telemetry                                                                  10
     6.1.1  Negative Pulse                                                          10
     6.1.2   Positive Pulse                                                           10
     6.1.3  Electromagnetic                                                         11
7.0    Rig Site Safety With Density and Neutron Logs                                     11





                                   Page 1 of 11                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 224 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE



1.0  Introduction

    A wide variety of information is available from the well that can be used by the geologist and
       petrophysicist  to  refine  the  geological and  petrophysical models and  to  gain a  better
      understanding of the reservoir, assess how large the reservoir is and how it will perform if placed
     on production.

      Information can be obtained from the following sources:

      •  Data collected whilst drilling
         •   Penetration rate
         •   Cuttings analysis
         •  Mud losses / gains
         •  Shows of gas / oil / water
      •  Core analysis
         •   Lithology
         •  Presence of shows
         •   Porosity
         •   Permeability
         •   Special core analysis
      •  Log analysis (wireline and MWD / LWD)
         •   Electrical logs
         •   Acoustic logs
         •   Radioactivity logs
         •   Pressure measurements
         •   Special logs
      •   Productivity tests
         •   Formation tester
         •    Drill stem test
         •   Production test

1.1 Mud Logging
     Data collected whilst drilling is usually incorporated as part of the mud logging service.

     The mud log provides a record of the penetration rate, lithology (inferred from cuttings analysis)
     and cuttings description on a depth basis together with general comments on the  drilling
      parameters, mud type and properties, hydrocarbon shows, logs run, cores cut, etc.

1.2  Coring
     Cores provide more accurate information than cuttings. However, unless special circumstances
       dictate, it is usually only cost effective to core the reservoir section of a well.

    A core allows a detailed lithological description of the reservoir to be made. Additional tests can
     be performed in the laboratory to establish the porosity and permeability of the rock, which can
      then be used to calibrate the response from logging tools.

1.3  Log Analysis
     Logs can be obtained by running specialist tools on wireline or, as is becoming more common,
     by including a LWD tool as part of the MWD toolstring. Note that not  all wireline logs are
       available as LWD logs.

    A log is the recording of the physical properties of the formations drilled on a depth basis.



                                   Page 2 of 11                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 225 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

1.4  Log Types
     Logs can be classified into three families

       1.  Reservoir Thickness (Gamma Ray and Spontaneous  Potential). Discriminate between
           reservoir and non-reservoir rocks
       2.  Porosity (Density, Neutron, Sonic). Used  to calculate  porosity,  identify  lithologies and
            differentiate oil from gas
       3.  Resistivity (Laterolog, Induction, Microresistivity). Together with porosity logs are used to
           calculate hydrocarbon saturations.

       Additional logs can also be run to measure specific properties
      Formation Tester – measures formation pressures and can retrieve small samples

      Dipmeter – measures the formation dip and azimuth
    VSP – used to calibrate seismic surveys
      Caliper – used to correct other log measurements, cement volumes, etc.

     Response from the tools varies under  differing conditions of pressure, temperature,  fluid
      environment and borehole size. Calibration is normally required to ensure quality and accuracy
       of the log.

      Recording speed is a function of the type of sonde, the quality of the data required and of the
      information to be collected.

      Detailed log interpretation is performed by powerful workstations, often installed in the logging
       units. Quick look analysis can still be performed, however  it is not the intent of this section to
      cover this subject.

1.5 Mud Invasion
     The majority of wells are drilled with a mud hydrostatic that  is greater than the formation
      pressure. In other words there is a differential pressure attempting to push the mud in the well
       into the formation. Across shales nothing happens as the shale is not permeable and there is
     nowhere for the drilling mud to go.

      Across a porous and permeable layer (a reservoir) this pressure differential pushes mud filtrate
       into the reservoir rock displacing the reservoir fluid. The depth of this invasion varies from
      centimetres to metres depending upon the differential pressure, the porosity and permeability of
      the formation and the ability of the drilling fluid to form a filter cake, which helps reduce the
     amount of fluid invasion. The depth of this invasion or flushed zone can be important, as if it is
      too deep then some tools will not be able to read past it.

2.0  Reservoir Definition

    A reservoir is a porous and permeable formation saturated with one or more fluids. The reservoir
        is composed of a rock matrix and a certain number of voids that contain the fluids. It can be
       highlighted by the following parameters

2.1  Porosity
     The volume occupied by all the fluids of the formation. It is the ratio of the pore volume to the
        total volume.
      Vp
     φ =
      Vb
     Where          φ     = porosity
                     Vp    = pore volume
                     Vb    = bulk volume





                                   Page 3 of 11                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 226 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

2.2  Permeability
     The ability with which a fluid can flow through the formation. Permeability is not quantitatively
     and directly obtainable from logs. Expressed using the Darcy equation
         k × A × ∆P   Q =
          µ × L
     Where      Q     = flow rate
                A     = cross sectional area
                 ∆P    = pressure differential
                   µ     = viscosity of the flowing fluid
                   L     = length
                K     = permeability
      Permeability is measure in Darcies where 1 Darcy = 0.9869 x 10-12 m2

2.3  Fluid Saturation
     The ratio of the volume of fluid present in the pores to the total pore volume
       Vf    S f =
       Vp


3.0  Log Presentation

     Log measurements are presented graphically on a standard API grid, which consists of three
      data tracks and a depth column.

      Track 1, on the  left hand side of the depth column, always has a linear scale and usually
      presents lithological data.

      Tracks 2 and 3, on the right hand side of the depth column are often combined and may be
       either on a linear or logarithmic scale or a combination of the two. These tracks present
      formation properties such as resistivity and porosity data.

      Several parameters may be recorded on the same track.

     The vertical depth scale of the log may be 1:1000 or 1:500 for correlation purposes, 1:200 for
      petrophysical evaluation or 1:40 for correlation with cores. In the USA vertical depth scales are
      often 1:1200, 1:600 and 1:240.

     The log header also contains useful information about the well and the drilling fluid in use at the
      time that the log was recorded.

4.0  Wireline Logs

4.1  Caliper

4.1.1 Principle
      Caliper tools measure the diameter and shape of the borehole using two or more arms
      symmetrically placed on the logging tool. Variations in the borehole diameter cause the caliper
     arms to open or close.

4.1.2 Log Presentation
     The caliper log is always recorded on track 1, on the left of the depth column, on a linear scale,
      graduated in inches. A vertical line indicated on the same scale represents the bit size and the
       caliper fluctuates around this value.

     Three typical cases can be observed:



                                   Page 4 of 11                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 227 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      •   Caliper value = bit size
         Hole is considered to be in gauge – typical of a tight formation
      •   Caliper value > bit size
         Hole is overgauge caused by a weak or unconsolidated formation or the formation has been
            partially dissolved by the drilling fluid
      •   Caliper value < bit size
         Hole is considered to be undergauge caused by swelling formation or the build up of a thick
               filter cake

4.1.3 Application
      Caliper measurements can be used for:

      •   measurement of hole volumes for cement calculations
      •    selection of suitable points to take formation pressure tests
      •    selection of suitable packer seats for openhole well testing
      •    correction of log readings for the effect of hole size and thickness of filter cake to generate
        a more quantitative interpretation

4.2 Gamma Ray

4.2.1 Principle
     The gamma ray log measures the natural radioactivity of the formations. The most common
      elements that emit naturally occurring radiation are potassium (K), thorium (Th) and uranium
       (U). These three elements continuously emit gamma rays, which are picked up by a radiation
      detector mounted on the gamma ray tool.

     Most reservoir rocks (sandstone, limestone, dolomite) contain none or very small amounts of
      these three elements and therefore have a low gamma ray radiation level. Other rocks types (eg
      shales) have a large amount of potassium and thorium atoms, resulting in a high gamma ray
       radiation level. This contrast in radiation levels can be used to differentiate between different
      formations.

4.2.2 Log Presentation
     The GR log is normally presented on track 1. It is recorded on a linear scale, graduated in API
       unity, from 0 to 100 or 0 to 150 API, increasing toward the right.

      Whilst the GR log is a general indicator of shaley formations, care must be taken as other
      formations can also exhibit high GR values.

4.2.2.1 Radioactivity in Shales or Clays
     Potassium and Thorium exist with shales and clays and are very good indicators of shales.

4.2.2.2 Radioactivity In Clastic Formations

      Generally clastic formations exhibit weak radioactive emissions, which give low GR values.
     However in certain circumstances these formations are associated with detrital elements, which
     can contain potassium and thus exhibit higher levels of natural radioactivity. An example of this
        is the presence of mica within the Brent sandstone sequence in the North Sea.


4.2.2.3 Radioactivity In Carbonate Formations
      Generally carbonates are not radioactive. However under certain conditions they can contain
      organic matter which gives a radioactive response due to the presence of Uranium 238. There
      are also shaly carbonates with significant radioactivity according to the type of shale.



                                   Page 5 of 11                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 228 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

4.2.2.4 Radioactivity In Evaporite Formations
      Evaporites such as halite and anhydrite have extremely low values of GR (< 5 API).

4.2.3 Application
     The GR has three main uses:

      •   Discrimination between reservoir and non-reservoir formations
      •   Correlation Tool
      •   Calculation of Clay or Shale Content

4.2.3.1 Correlation
     Due to it’s ability to repeat, the GR is an extremely useful tool to correlate not only other logs
       within the same well but also to correlate information between different wells.

4.2.3.2 Calculation of Clay Content
     An approximation of the clay or shale content of a formation can be made using the following
      formula:

       GR read - GR min    Vsh =
       GR max - GR min

     Where:           Vsh    = Clay or shale content
                       GRread = GR reading at the point of interest
                     GRmin  = GR reading from a clean formation
                    GRmax  = GR reading in 100% shale formation

4.2.4 Limitations
      For quantitative use the logging speed should be around 1200 ft/hr.

      For qualitative use higher logging speeds can be used but a smoothed curve will result.

     Potassium muds will increase the readings.

4.3  Density Log

4.3.1 Principle
    A strong gamma ray source bombards the rock with medium energy gamma rays. These
    gamma rays collide with electrons in the formation. In the process the gamma rays loose some
       of their energy and are scattered in all directions. The count rate of these scattered gamma rays
      reaching the tool detector gives an indication of the formation bulk density.

     From the bulk density an assessment of the formation porosity can be made.

4.3.2 Log Presentation
      Density is generally recorded on track 2 or 3 often together with the Neutron log, on a linear
       scale.

4.3.3 Application
     From the bulk density recorded by the tool, porosity can be calculated using the following
      equation:




                                   Page 6 of 11                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 229 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

       ρ m - ρ b     φ =
       ρ m - ρ f

     Where:         φ     = Porosity
                    ρm    = Density of the rock matrix
                        ρb     = Bulk density from the log
                              ρf     = Density of the mud filtrate

4.3.4 Limitations
     The density tool has a depth of investigation of 10 to 15 cm so only records in the flushed zone.

4.4  Neutron Log

4.4.1 Principle
    A neutron source bombards the formation with high energy neutrons. As the neutrons collide
      with atoms present in the formation they slow down. Hydrogen atoms slow them down especially
       quickly. The tool measures the returning neutrons at two distances from the source and from
       this computes the amount of hydrogen atoms in the formation. The tool assumes that  all
      hydrogen atoms are only present in the pore space of the formation and from this computes a
       porosity value.

     The main tools run are:

      •       Sidewall Neutron Porosity (SNP), which is a pad type tool
      •      Compensated Neutron Log (CNL), which is a mandrel type tool

4.4.2 Log Presentation
     The neutron log is generally recorded on track 2 or 3 together with the density curve. The curve
        is scaled in porosity units (pu). As the pu reference is water filled limestone a correction is
      required for different formations.

4.4.3 Application
     Log is used to calculate porosity values for the formation.

4.4.4 Limitations
       In gas bearing formations the low density of hydrogen atoms causes a low porosity reading.
    When combined with the density log a marked “gas effect” is noticeable where the density log
      kicks to the left (increasing porosity / decreasing density) and the neutron log kicks to the right
      (decreasing porosity).

      Shales contain clay bound water. The neutron tool interprets this water as porosity, when in
       reality there is no effective porosity present.

     The neutron tool has a depth of investigation of 15 to 20 cm so only records in the flushed zone.

4.5  Sonic Log

4.5.1 Principle
     The sonic tool measures the time  it takes for an acoustic or sound wave to travel through the
    mud and formation.

      Tool most commonly run today is the Borehole Compensated (BHC) sonic which automatically
      corrects the readings for any borehole effects.



                                   Page 7 of 11                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 230 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      Tool generally needs to be well centralised in the hole.

4.5.2 Log Presentation
     The sonic log is usually recorded on track 3 on a linear scale. The travel time is recorded in
      microseconds / ft on a scale ranging from 40 to 140 increasing to the left.

4.5.3 Application
      Sonic log can be used as follows:

      •   Calculate porosity (not as effectively as density or neutron logs)
      •   Lithology identification and correlation
      •   Over-pressure detection

4.6  Resistivity Log

4.6.1 Principle
     The resistivity tool measures the resistivity of the formation to an electrical current.

     Most rocks are resistant to an electrical current compared to fluids which are generally good
      conductors, except hydrocarbons.

       In the case of a porous formation, and as a result of fluid invasion, the mud filtrate displaces the
      formation fluids and creates three different zones with different resistivities.

     These zones are known as:

      •   Flushed zone, close to the borehole wall, with a resistivity of Rxo
      •   Transitional zone, with a resistivity of Ri
      •  Uninvaded or virgin zone, with a resistivity of Rt

      According to the Archie, in a water bearing formation the ratio of Rt to Rxo is a constant whilst is
     a hydrocarbon bearing reservoir the ratio is not constant and Rt increases more than Rxo.

      Using this information different readings can be taken in the uninvaded zone and the flushed
      zone.

       In non reservoir rock there is no filtrate invasion, so Rxo = Ri = Rt.

      Large spacing sondes, such as the laterolog (LL), dual laterolog (DLL) and spherically focused
      log (SFL), read in the uninvaded zone. They have a large spacing between the transmitter and
      the receiver (24” to 64”) and can be influenced by mud type.

      Small spacing pad type sondes, such as the microlog (ML), micro laterolog (MLL) and micro
       spherically focused log (MSFL), read in the flushed zone. They have a short spacing of a few
      inches between the transmitter and the receiver.

          If non conductive muds are being used then induction logs can be used to measure the
        resistivity of the formation.

4.6.2 Log Presentation
       Resistivity is recorded on track 2 on a log scale from 0.2 to 2000 ohm m

4.6.3 Application
     Used to differentiate between hydrocarbon and water bearing intervals.

     Used to quantify the water saturation in hydrocarbon bearing intervals.

                                   Page 8 of 11                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 231 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


4.7  Formation Tester
     The formation tester (RFT – repeat formation tester, MDT – modular dynamics tester or FMT –
      formation multiple tester being the more common varieties of  this tool) are run to obtain
      formation pressures, pressure gradients, permeability estimates and formation samples.

     The tool has a pad containing a seal packer opposite an arm. At the depth of interest, the arm is
      opened, forcing the pad and seal packer into contact with formation. Pre-test and pressure build
     up information  is obtained. From this information the formation permeability and formation
      pressure can be determined. By reviewing this information at different depths pressure gradients
     can also be determined.

     Depending upon the formation permeability  it might take some time to obtain a valid set of
      readings. In high overbalance wells the risk of the tool becoming differentially stuck can be high
       (the RFT is not known as the Repeat Fishing Tool for nothing!). Contingency plans for the
      recovery of stuck formation tester logs should be established prior to running this tool (or any
      other log for that matter).

     Care should be taken with the MDT tool as this tool has the ability to pump small volumes of
      formation fluid into the wellbore. In gas or condensate wells small volumes at depth can easily
     become large volumes at surface, so it is always wise to follow the MDT program carefully and
      not assume that it is just another logging run.

5.0  Pipe Conveyed Logging

       In highly deviated wells (angle greater than 60 degrees) and in other wells with poor hole
       condition, it is common to run wireline logs on the end of drillpipe, using the drillpipe to push the
      logs to the required depth.

    A typical procedure for such an operation is as follows:

      •  Make up wireline toolstring
      •  Make up wet connect sub to drillpipe
      •  RIH drillpipe to required depth, breaking circulation on a regular basis to ensure that the
          ports in the wet connect sub are not blocked
      •  Make up side entry sub
      •   Rig up wireline sheaves
      •   Install wet connect and pump down.
      •   Latch wet connect and test. Secure side entry sub pack off.
      •  RIH to required depth
      •  POOH logging as required
      •  Once logging is complete POOH to side entry sub.
      •  Recover wet connect and rig down wireline
      •  POOH

       Prior to commencing a pipe conveyed logging operation a detailed planning meeting is required
       that needs to focus on:

      •  Communication between the driller and the wireline winch operator
      •   Connection procedure after running the side entry sub to minimise the risk of crimping the
          cable
      •  Working with sheaves and cable in the derrick whilst running the blocks up and down
      •   Contingency measures in the event of
         •   Stuck pipe
         •   Well control incident (note that most annular preventers will NOT seal against drillpipe
            and wireline cable)



                                   Page 9 of 11                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 232 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

6.0 LWD

      Apart from inclination and azimuth measurements (the traditional MWD tools), the following data
     can also be measured and transmitted to surface in real time or recorded for later analysis:

      •  Gamma Ray
      •   Resistivity
      •   Density
      •   Neutron Porosity
      •   Sonic
      •    Drill Mechanics (Vibration, Downhole Weight on Bit, Downhole Torque)
      •   Pressure While Drilling
      •   Acoustic Caliper

      Apart from proving information on the formations, as with wireline logs, the formation evaluation
      logs (gamma, resistivity, density and neutron porosity) can also be used to geosteer horizontal
       wells, ensuring that the well trajectory remains within a pre-defined formation, or at least
      minimises the amount of non-reservoir formation that is drilled.

     The drilling mechanics and pressure while drilling logs provide information that can be used to
      optimise drilling performance, reduce problems associated with hole cleaning and minimise
      problems associated with  drillstring  failure by  alerting the  driller and  directional  driller  to
     downhole vibration and drillstring compression.

     The formation evaluation logs work on the same principle and have the same application as
       wireline logs.

6.1  Telemetry
     Log data acquired while drilling can either be recorded in memory mode or transmitted real time
     back to surface. The three techniques currently available are:

      •   Negative Pulse
      •   Positive Pulse
      •   Electromagnetic

6.1.1 Negative Pulse
     The negative pulse tool uses a sliding gate and seat valve to momentarily vent fluid from the
       inside of the drill string to the annulus, creating a pressure drop that propagates to surface,
     where it can be recorded by a pressure sensor on the standpipe manifold.

     The amplitude of the negative pulse signal is a function of the differential pressure between the
      bore of the drillstring and the annulus. Most tools specify a minimum pressure drop of at least
      350psi.

     Most tools have a mass flow rate limit to prevent excessive erosion of the gate and seat
     components.

     The pulser valve is powered by lithium batteries.

          If a float sub is being run in the string, always ensure that  it is run above the pulser sub  to
      prevent back flow through the valve when tripping in to prevent damage.

6.1.2 Positive Pulse
     The positive pulse system is usually powered by a mud turbine that fits within the pulser sub.
     The turbine powers an electrical generator and a hydraulic pump. The generator provides
       electrical power fore both the pulser control circuitry and the sensors, while the hydraulic pump



                                   Page 10 of 11                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 233 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      supplies power for the hydraulic solenoid, which activates a poppet valve to induce a pressure
      pulse.

     To transmit data the poppet valve is extended into a flow orifice, restricting the flow of mud
       inside the drill string and creating a momentary pressure increase that propagates to surface,
     where it can be recorded by a pressure sensor on the standpipe manifold.

6.1.3 Electromagnetic
      Electromagnetic telemetry systems can only be used on land  wells  at present. Data  is
      transmitted to surface using electromagnetic waves, generated by a downhole sub, that travel
      through the formations to surface. At surface the electromagnetic wave is received as a voltage
       potential between the conductive drillstring and a ground electrode. The ground electrode is
      usually a metal stake placed in the ground a few hundred feet from the well.

      This system does  not  require a  drilling  fluid  to  transmit  data, so  is  ideally  suited  to
      underbalanced drilling.

     The tool is normally battery powered.

7.0  Rig Site Safety With Density and Neutron Logs

     As density and neutron logs require the use of radioactive sources, a safety meeting should be
      held  prior  to picking up or running these  tools. Only approved personnel are to handle
      radioactive materials.





                                   Page 11 of 11                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 234 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

                  SECTION 11
               RIG EQUIPMENT & SIZING


     Contents
1.0    Generations of Offshore Drilling Units                                             2
  1.1  Year of construction                                                           2
  1.2  Technical Capability                                                           2
  1.3  Generations of Semisubs                                                       2
  1.4  Timeline of Generations                                                        3
  1.5  Timeline of Technical Capability                                                 4
  1.6  Comparison of Ocean Victory Class Rig Specifications                                5
2.0    Semi-submersible Hull Designs                                                  8
  2.1  Aker H3                                                                    9
  2.2  Aker H4.2                                                                  11
  2.3  Pacesetters                                                                 12
  2.4 Sedco 700                                                                  14
  2.5 Sedco 711                                                                  15
  2.6 GVA 4000                                                                  16
  2.7 GVA 4500                                                                  17
  2.8 SES 5000                                                                  18
3.0    Transocean Sedco Forex Newbuilds                                             19





                                   Page 1 of 19                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 235 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


1.0  Generations of Offshore Drilling Units

      Generations are used to differentiate semi-submersible hulls. This section describes the term
      “Generations”.

1.1  Year of construction
      Generation is traditionally based on age. Semi-submersibles are built to satisfy demand and
      construction dates coincide with peaks in  oil price and increased demand. Generations are
     based on the following construction dates;

            Generation          Year of Construction
                  1st                 1962 to 1969
               2nd                 1970 to 1981
                 3rd                 1982 to 1986
                 4th                 1987 to 1998
                 5th                 1999 onwards (?)

1.2  Technical Capability
      Generation is based on the technology of equipment installed on the rig. When rigs are built they
      generally reflect the technology available at the time. As technology develops more complex
     work can be carried out and over the past thirty years semi-submersibles have moved into
      deeper water to drill deeper more complex wells.

        Generation    Examples of Development of Technology
                  1st         800  ft water depth, 2 x 1250 hp mud pumps, Kelly, 1,450 ton
                            variable deck load (VDL), manual derrick
               2nd         1,500 ft water depth, 2 x 1600 hp mud pumps, Kelly, 3,000 ton
                      VDL, manual derrick
                 3rd          2,500 ft water depth, 2 x 1600 hp mud pumps, Kelly, 3,800 ton
                      VDL, automatic pipehandling
                 4th          3,500 ft water depth, 3 x 1600 hp mud pumps, TDS3 topdrive,
                        4,300 ton VDL, automatic pipehandling
                 5th          8,000 ft water depth, 5 x 2200 hp mud pumps, TDS 8 topdrive ,
                         5,00 ton VDL, dual activity

1.3  Generations of Semisubs
      Generations  of semis are  traditionally based on year  of construction, however   if a  rig’s
     equipment is upgraded to a more modern level of technology then it would effectively be a newer
      generation rig.

     Example
     The Ocean Victory was built in 1972 and should be classed as a 1st Generation semi. In 1996
      the rig was upgraded to 5,000 ft water depth, 5,600 ton VDL, 3 x 1600 hp mud pumps. Based on
      technology of rig equipment the Ocean Victory would be classed as a 4th generation semi.





                                   Page 2 of 19                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 236 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                     DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

  1.4  Timeline of Generations

          Floating Drilling Rigs Generation Timeline

11000
                                                                                            3rd Gen. Drillships
                                                                                         Discover Enterprise
10000                                                                                             Pathfinder
                                                        Ocean          Gusto 10000
 9000                                                  Odyssey

 8000                                                                          Piper Alpha
                                                         Ocean Ranger
 7000                                                     Alexander Keilland

 6000                                                    2nd Gen. Drillships                                 5th Gen, Semi              DEPTH                                                                                      Sedco Express                                                                      Discoverer Seven Seas / 534
                                                                                                             Bingo 9000
 5000                                                   Sedco 400 Series                                                           Ocean Clipper
                                                              Gusto Pelican Class              4th Gen, Semi
 4000                 1st Gen. Drillships                                          GVA 4500
                    Global Marine Cuss Class                                                       Aker H 4.2
                                                                                                                    Ultra Yatzy              WATER 3000                                                                            3rd Gen, Semi  L-1020 Trendsetter
                                                  2nd Gen, Semi              Sedco 711      Mitsui SES-5000
 2000                                         Sedco 700                 Sedco 600
                                                      Aker H3                    Aker H3.2
                 1st Gen. Semi                           Pentagone                    L-907/945/9500 Pacesetter
 1000       Sedco 135                             L-900 Pacesetter          GVA 4000
              Ocean Driller                            OceanVictory               Bingo 3000
     0
     1955  1960  1965  1970  1975  1980  1985  1990  1995  2000  2005





                                      Page 3 of 19                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 237 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                     DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

   1.5  Timeline of Technical Capability

   6 5 0 0            Pumping Capabilities
   6 0 0 0                                                                         5 x 2200 HP
   5 5 0 0
   5 0 0 0
   4 5 0 0   4 0 0 0       minute
                                                                              3 x 2200 HP
   3 5 0 0    per
   3 0 0 0
   2 5 0 0                                                               3 x 1600 HP
   2 0 0 0
                                          2 x 1600 HP
   1 5 0 0                            Gallons 2 x 1250 HP
   1 0 0 0
        1 9 5 5   1 9 6 0   1 9 6 5   1 9 7 0   1 9 7 5   1 9 8 0   1 9 8 5   1 9 9 0   1 9 9 5   2 0 0 0   2 0 0 5
 7 0 0 0 0          Drilling System Torque Ratings
                                                                   TDS 8
 6 0 0 0 0                                                 TDS 6


 5 0 0 0 0
                                                 TDS 4

 4 0 0 0 0

                                        TDS 3 3 0 0 0 0         Kelly bushing                                         Footpounds
 2 0 0 0 0
          1 9 5 5    1 9 6 0    1 9 6 5    1 9 7 0    1 9 7 5    1 9 8 0    1 9 8 5    1 9 9 0    1 9 9 5    2 0 0 0    2 0 0 5
Well
Types              Vertical                                           Deviated         Complex





                                      Page 4 of 19                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 238 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


1.6  Comparison of Ocean Victory Class Rig Specifications





     Name:              Ocean Prospector
     Rig Type:              Semisubmersible
     Rig Design:          Ocean Victory
     Year Built:            1971
     Yard Built:               Mitsubishi, Hiroshima, Japan
      Class:             ABS
      Registry :           Panama
     Water Depth - Ft:       1,500
       Drilling Depth - Ft:      25,000
      Quarters:             77 + 3 bed hospital
     Dimensions:            338' x 263' x 126'
      Helideck:                82' x 79' for S-61
       Drilling Draft:            70'
      Variable Deckload:      Operating: 2,250 LT / Transit : 1,341 LT
     Operating Displacement: 23,722 LT
     Bulk Mud & Cement:    9,320 cu. ft.
      Liquid Mud:            1,447 bbls.
      Fuel Oil:               7,746 bbls.
       Drill Water:            13,520 bbls.
     Potable Water:        355 bbls.
     Sack Storage:          4,000 sacks
     Drawworks:             Continental Emsco C-3-II w/1-3/8" drill line
      Derrick:              Lee C. Moore 40' x 40' x 152', 1,000 kips, Cantilever mast
     Top Drive:            N/A
     Pipe Handling System: N/A
      Rotary:                  National D-495, 49½"
    Mud Pumps:              (2) Continental Emsco FB-1300
     Main Engines:            (4) Fairbanks Morse 38-D-8-1/8
     Annular BOP:            (1) Shaffer 18-3/4" 5M
    Ram BOP:                (2) Cameron "U" (double) 18-3/4" 10M
      Riser:               Regan 21" FD-8
      Riser Tensioning:      640 kips
      Solids Control:           (3) Brandt LCM-2D, Cascade system
     Cranes:                   (2) Seaking SK-3500 w/130' boom
     Mooring System:        (8) 2-3/4" x 5,200' chains, 15 ton Moorfast anchors
     Dynamic Positioning:  N/A





                                   Page 5 of 19                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 239 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
               DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE





Name:               Ocean Endeavor
Rig Type:              Semisubmersible
Rig Design:          Ocean Victory
Year Built:            1975
Yard Built:                Transfield, Fremantle, Australia
Class:             ABS
Registry :           Panama
Water Depth - Ft:       2,000
Drilling Depth - Ft:      25,000
Quarters:             82 + 3 bed hospital
Dimensions:            323' x 292' x 128'
Helideck:                 83' x 83' for S-61
Drilling Draft:            70'
Variable Deckload -     Operating 2,250 LT / Transit 1,456 LT
Operating Displacement: 23,127 LT
Bulk Mud & Cement:    9,600 cu. ft.
Liquid Mud:            1,830 bbls.
Fuel Oil:               6,972 bbls.
Drill Water:            10,984 bbls.
Potable Water:        620 bbls.
Sack Storage:          4,000 sacks
Drawworks:             Continental Emsco C-3-II w/1-3/8" drill line
Derrick:              Lee C. Moore 40' x 40' x 180', 1,400 kips static hook load capacity,
                          Cantilever Mast
Top Drive:             Varco TDS-4S w/PH-85 pipe handler
Pipe Handling System: BJ Type V lower racking arm, Varco Model 2000 Iron Roughneck
Rotary:                  Continental Emsco T-495, 49½"
Mud Pumps:              (2) Continental Emsco FB-1300
Main Engines:            (4) EMD 16-645-E8
Annular BOP:             (2) Hydril GL 18-3/4 " 5M
Ram BOP:                (2) Shaffer SL (double) 18-3/4" 10M
Riser:                 Vetco 21" MR6-B
Riser Tensioning:      640 kips
Solids Control:           (3) Brandt triple tandem, (3) Derrick Flo-Line Cleaners, Cascade
                      system
Cranes:                   (2) Favco Mod. 80,000 w/120' booms
Mooring System:         (8) 3" x 5,300' ORQ+20 chains, 15 ton Moorfast anchors
Dynamic Positioning:   N/A





                              Page 6 of 19                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 240 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
               DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE





Name:               Ocean Victory
Rig Type:              Semisubmersible
Rig Design:           Enhanced Ocean Victory
Year Built:            1972
Yard Built:             Avondale Shipyard, New Orleans, LA
Class:            AMS AI (M) CSDU
Registry :           Panama
Water Depth - Ft:       5,000
Drilling Depth - Ft:      25,000
Quarters:             104 + 2bed hospital
Dimensions:            336' x 290' x 128'
Helideck:                 83' x 83' for S-61
Drilling Draft:            74.5'
Variable Deckload:     Operating 5,000 LT / Transit 3,500 LT
Operating Displacement: 32,838 LT
Bulk Mud & Cement:    13,800 cu. ft.
Liquid Mud:            3,094 bbls.
Fuel Oil:               6,664 bbls.
Drill Water:            13,569 bbls.
Potable Water:        812 bbls.
Sack Storage:          4,000 sacks
Drawworks:             Continental Emsco C-3-II w/1-5/8" drill line
Derrick:               Dreco 40' x 40' x 180', 1,400 kips static hook load, Cantilever Mast
Top Drive:           TDS-4S w/PH85 pipe handler
Pipe Handling System:  N/A
Rotary:                  National D-495, 49½"
Mud Pumps:              (3) Continental Emsco FB-1600
Main Engines:            (5) Caterpillar D-3516
Annular BOP:             (2) Shaffer 18-3/4" 10M
Ram BOP:                (2) Shaffer SLX (double) 18-3/4" 15M
Riser:                   Shaffer 21" FT
Riser Tensioning:      1,280 kips
Solids Control:           (5) Derrick Cascade shakers
Cranes:                   (3) SeaTrax 6032 w/140' booms
Mooring System:         (8) 3-1/4" x 4,200' ORQ+20 chains, (8) 3-1/2" x 8,800' mooring wires,
                      Bruce 10 MT MK-4 anchors
Dynamic Positioning:   N/A





                              Page 7 of 19                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 241 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

2.0  Semi-submersible Hull Designs





                                   Page 8 of 19                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 242 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

2.1  Aker H3





                                   Page 9 of 19                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 243 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE





         Page 10 of 19                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 244 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE



2.2  Aker H4.2





                                   Page 11 of 19                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 245 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

2.3  Pacesetters





                                   Page 12 of 19                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 246 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE





         Page 13 of 19                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 247 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

2.4  Sedco 700





                                   Page 14 of 19                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 248 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

2.5  Sedco 711





                                   Page 15 of 19                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 249 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

2.6 GVA 4000





                                   Page 16 of 19                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 250 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

2.7 GVA 4500





                                   Page 17 of 19                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 251 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

2.8 SES 5000





                                   Page 18 of 19                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 252 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

Transocean Sedco Forex Newbuilds





                                   Page 19 of 19                         Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 253 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
TechnologyTechnology
DrillingDrilling
DeepwaterDeepwater
inin
AdvancesAdvances


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 254 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
DrillingDrilling
DeepwaterDeepwater                                             drillships                                                                                                              semisubmersibles
ReengineeringReengineering                                                                        Enterprise-class                  Express-class

        


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 255 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
               Rig   ft.                                                               15%-40%                                           10,000                                         Activity              to                                             GainsStandard
                     Dual                                   water
               1st  in                                                                                          EfficiencyIndustry                       work                                                    Industry’s   Can      DesignNew
A
Enterprise-Class:


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 256 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
       FTFT FTFT FTFT                FTFT MTMT MTMT
             6262                4242           835835 125125
                                                                  100,000100,000  20,00020,000
                                                                                       CAPACITYCAPACITY                      LENGTHLENGTH   BREADTHBREADTH  DEPTHDEPTH  DRAFTDRAFT     DISPLACEMENTDISPLACEMENT VDLVDLOverview
Vessel


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 257 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
Rather

/                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                TRANSOCEAN RATHER


                                                                                                                                                                                                                SCALEDSS
                                                                                                                                                                      SAME                                                                                                                                        DISCOVERER ENTERPRISE                                                                                                                             THEto
                                                                                   TO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                DRAWN
                                          E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DISCOVERERTERPRISEEN                                   AR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   VESSELS                      SEAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                THREE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DISCOVERER SEVEN
                                                                                                                             ALLComparison


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 258 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
Astrodome
to
Comparison


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 259 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                        and                        Marine
        of                                                                       Knuckle-                                                                  Consumables                                                               Handling                  MT            of                            20,000’                  60
         X            for                                                        Tubular                              Worth                  (4
                    Space                                    Well’s
      2                DeckRiser+        AutomatedCraneageboom)Space
Deck


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 260 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
   ..

   ..

   ..
             rrickDerrickDe
               SingleSingle
   aa
                          UnderneathUnderneathActivity                                PSIPSI                     Cap.Cap.               HousedHoused          ))                     lbs.lbs.                      7,5007,500Dual                                     226ft226ft
       xx                  HPHP  HP,HP,         HPHP                                                                                                          SystemSystem                                     TonTon                     StationsStations                                                                             MountedMounted                                                2,000,0002,000,000 StandsStands 80ft80ft             ftft xx   5,0005,000   2,2002,200  500500              1,1501,150
     XX   XX XX XX   XX                                                                           Crown     22 135135 80ft80ft 22 44 22 (Crown(  22                                                                                                                                             HandlingHandling                     DrillingDrilling
                                                                                                          FluidsFluids                  ServiceService
                                                     bblbbl
          FullFull                                                      PUMPSPUMPS                                                                                DRIVEDRIVE
        TwoTwo                                     DERRICKDERRICK                         DRAWWORKSDRAWWORKS  MUDMUD   MOTIONMOTION COMPENSATORSCOMPENSATORS     TOPTOP    >15,000>15,000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 261 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                 or
    DP                                                                        Casing                                                           Collars                      HWDP           6-5/8”
    +  +           of    of                                                       9-5/8”                                          Drill    AND                                                                                            Components                        of                 of                           (>60,000’)                                                                                            (>10,000’)                      Stds       StdsCapacity           20        BHA       Stds                                  Stds      450                        84                 46
Tubular
Derrick


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 262 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
Pipe
Automated

-        Systems
Enterprise         Handling
Discoverer


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 263 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
Floor
Drill

-
Enterprise
Discoverer


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 264 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
Workstations
Driller
Assistant
&
Driller


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 265 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
     CabinEnterprise
         DrillersDiscoverer


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 266 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                              SINGLESINGLE ACTIVITYACTIVITY                                                      DUALDUAL ACTIVITYACTIVITY

Sequence
Work
                                                                                                                                     hole
                                                                                               tools                    hole                                                     tools                                                                                                   tools                                                      tools                           17-1/2"hole                                 hole                                                     tools                                                 tools                                           cement                                                     tools                 17-1/2"               26"       tools                                                                                                    tools                                           cement                                                                        26"       tools                                                   cement          test BHA    BHA               casing                                                                                                                                                                    cement          test BHA    BHA               casing                         drill                                                               casing                                                                                                                                                                                                                     casing                                                                                                                        drill                                                          casing running                                          casing,           BHA                                                                           BHA               casing running                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 casing,            BHA    BHA casing                                                BOP,                                                                              casing                                                                                                                           BOP,            26"                    BHA, 26"         casing, 20"                 17-1/2"         17-1/2"                 13-3/8"       26"                                                                                                BHA, 26"         casing, 20"                 17-1/2"         17-1/2"                 13-3/8"                      20"            riser                                 13-3/8"                                                                               20"            riser                                  13-3/8"        up                 up                 up                 up                                                                        riser,                     17-1/2"BHA,drill                          20"               26"                                                                                                                             13-3/8"              26"                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 13-3/8"                                                                                  20"                                                                                                                                                                                         riser,                     17-1/2"BHA,drill               up                      up                                 up                                                           up                                                                       up                                                    up                                                 Time                Make Run Retrieve Rig Run Retrieve Rig Run Make Run Retrieve Rig Run Retrieve          Make Run Retrieve Rig Run Retrieve Rig Run Make Run Retrieve Rig Run Retrieve
     1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14   1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 267 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
Tensioners
Acting
Direct


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 268 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                of
                               feet                                                                               Energy contract                                 25%                 Derrick
                            on                                       8,500                                            gain                                                                  SedcoMilestone                to                                                   providers                 Tri-Act
                up                                                                communications                                                             Express       1st         in                                       service                                            efficiency                                                                                                         Express,                               work                                                                       CajunOffshore                                                             2000                        Industry’s         Enhanced among   Can water       Design      Sedco and in
Another
Express:
Sedco


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 269 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                              PSIPSI
               Cap.Cap.
             ))                                                   7,5007,500                      AHCAHC
                              HP,HP,                          2,550MT2,550MT                                                                MountedMounted                                      Dreco HPHP                             StandsStands        Dreco                       HighHigh /          ftft                      2,2002,200           Act
          XX                         Tri-ActTri 135135 190ft190ft   Hitec/Hitec 6,8006,800 33  N/AN/A (Crown(Crown

Derrick                                           PUMPSPUMPS                          DERRICKDERRICK                         DRAWWORKSDRAWWORKS     MUDMUD   MOTIONMOTION COMPENSATORSCOMPENSATORS
Tri-Act


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 270 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
        FTFT FTFT FTFT                FTFT MTMT
                6565           349349 226226 111111                                                6,0006,000
                                                                            CAPACITYCAPACITY                       LENGTHLENGTH   BREADTHBREADTH  HEIGHTHEIGHT  DRAFTDRAFT VDLVDL
Overview
Hull


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 271 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
DrillingDrilling
DeepwaterDeepwater
ofof
EraEra
NewNew
AA


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 272 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

                   SECTION 12

                 DRILLING PROBLEMS


     Contents
1.0    Introduction                                                                 2
2.0    Fishing                                                                    2
3.0    Lost Circulation                                                              3
  3.1  Preventative Practices                                                         3
  3.2  Remedial Action                                                              3
4.0    Hole Stability                                                                3
  4.1  Naturally Fractured Shales                                                      4
  4.2  Incorrect Mud Weight                                                          4
  4.3  Pressure Invasion                                                            4
  4.4  Fluid Invasion and Hydration Stress                                               4
5.0    Hydrates                                                                   5
  5.1  Inhibition                                                                    5
  5.2  Well Control                                                                 5
  5.3  Well Testing                                                                 5





                                   Page 1 of 5                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 273 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE



1.0  Introduction

       Drilling problems cover non-routine events such as:

      •   Well Control
      •   Stuck Pipe
      •   Fishing
      •   Lost Circulation
      •   Hole Stability
      •   Hydrates
      •  Mud Contamination
      •   Hole Cleaning
      •   Formation Damage

      Well Control will not be covered in this manual. See Transocean Sedco Forex Well Control
      Manual.

      Stuck Pipe will not be covered in this manual. See Transocean Sedco Forex Driller’s Stuck Pipe
     Handbook.

    Some of the above subjects have been covered in earlier sections of this manual and will not be
      discussed further.

     The key to dealing with drilling problems is to be aware of what is likely to occur and to have
      contingency plans and equipment in place to effectively deal with them.

2.0  Fishing

     There is a multitude of fishing tools available to cover a whole range of scenarios.

     However, the single most important rule is to always have sufficient fishing equipment available
     on the rig to make a first attempt at fishing any tool that is run in the hole. To accomplish this it is
      important to have a detailed drawing of  all tools, including wireline logging tools, that show
      outside and inside dimensions.

     Of course, if logistics are an issue then additional equipment can be held on site.

    A typical fishing equipment list includes

      •   Overshots
      •   Sufficient Grapples (Spiral and / or Basket) to cover all sizes plus over and undersize
      •   Overshot Lip Guides and Extensions
      •   Fishing Jars and Accelerators
      •  Bumper Subs
      •  Taper Taps
      •   Safety Joints
      •  Reverse Circulating Junk Baskets
      •   Mills

     Always ensure that the dimensions of any fishing tools are recorded prior to them being run in
      the hole. DO NOT RELY ON GENERIC SCHEMATICS FOR MEASUREMENTS. This applies
      also to replacement tools (crossovers etc).

     Always ensure that all relevant personnel are aware of how particular tools operate.

     Always ensure that tools have been re-dressed correctly prior to them being run in the hole. If
       possible, perform a function check.

                                   Page 2 of 5                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 274 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


     Always ensure  that  fishing  tools are included on preventative maintenance  routines.  All
      elastomers (eg overshot packers) have a finite shelf life. Ensure that they are stored correctly
     and replaced regularly.

3.0  Lost Circulation

      Lost circulation can occur at any time. Prevention measures should be established during well
      planning and lost circulation treatments should be specified in the Drilling Fluids Program.

3.1  Preventative Practices
      •   Minimise annular loading – increases in ECD due to excessive drilled cuttings is a common
         cause of lost circulation, especially in top hole sections. This can be minimised by controlling
        ROP.
      •   Maintain Good Drilling Fluid Properties – maintain gel strengths, yield point and viscosities at
           levels that will effectively clean the hole. Maintain low solids levels with efficient use of solids
           control equipment.
      •   Minimise Swab and Surge Pressures – Break circulation regularily on trips in the hole. Bring
          the pumps up slowly after connections. Rotate the pipe before turning on the pumps.
        Reduce tripping speeds if losses occur.
      •  Keep ECD to a Minimum – Reduce annulus restrictions. Keep hydraulics to the minimum
           level required to clean the hole. Consider controlling ROP.

3.2  Remedial Action
     Losses should be dealt with as soon as they occur.

     The hole should be kept  full at  all times, even  if this means topping up the annulus with
      seawater.

       In some wells it may be desirable to have a pit ready mixed with a LCM pill or to run LCM in the
        drilling fluid system. Alternatively, especially in the reservoir section, LCM such as calcium
      carbonate can be run as a weighting agent.

    LCM  pill formulations are generally designed around the severity of losses, using smaller
      concentrations  for seepage losses and higher concentrations  for  total losses. Usually a
      combination of granular, flake and fibrous material in different grades is mixed and pumped to
      cure the losses. Typical formulations and concentrations are shown below.

     LCM Type          Seepage             Partial           Severe
                       1 – 10 bbl/hr     10 – 50 bbl/hr    50 – 500 bbl/hr
       Granular           5 – 10 ppb      10 – 15 ppb      20 – 25 ppb
       Flake             5 – 10 ppb       5 – 10 ppb      10 – 15 ppb
       Fibrous            0 – 5 ppb       10 – 15 ppb      15 – 20 ppb

      Granular LCM       - Nut plug, Calcium carbonate, Graphite
      Flake LCM           - Cellophane, Mica
      Fibrous LCM        - Cellulose, Wood fibre, Pulverised formica

     Care must be taken not to plug the drill string (nozzles or downhole tools such as MWD).

          If total losses occur or the severe loss pill does not work, then consideration should be given to
      using a barytes or diesel oil and bentonite (gunk squeeze) or diesel oil, bentonite and cement or
     a sodium silicate and cement pill.

4.0  Hole Stability

      Hole  instability generally occurs  in shales. Shales have low permeability and are  partially
     composed of clay minerals. The main causes of shale instability are:


                                   Page 3 of 5                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 275 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


      •    Naturally fractured shales
      •    Incorrect mud weight
      •    Pressure invasion
      •    Fluid invasion and hydration stress
      •      Drill string vibration

4.1  Naturally Fractured Shales
      With naturally fractured formations the rock is mechanically incompetent before drilling takes
      place. This  is a problem that has to be lived with and problems should be minimised by
      establishing procedures that optimise hole cleaning, reduce pressure fluctuations and minimise
         drill string vibration. Back reaming may be required on trips.

4.2  Incorrect Mud Weight
     There is a stress increase in the rock around the borehole as the well is drilled. This stress
      increase is counteracted, in most cases, by the hydrostatic pressure of the mud column.

          If the rock stress is greater than the mud hydrostatic pressure i.e. the mud weight is too low,
      then the shale can fail and fragment. Once failure has occurred, the fragmented shale can easily
         fall into the well.

          If the mud hydrostatic pressure is too high then the rock can breakdown and losses can occur.

     The stress distribution around the borehole is dependent upon the inclination and azimuth. This
      tends to be worse In deviated wells, which is why higher mud weights are often required to drill
      deviated wells.

      Borehole stability charts can be generated by computer models to show the minimum required
    mud weight to drill at certain inclinations and azimuths.

4.3  Pressure Invasion
       In permeable formations a  filter cake  is generated on the borehole wall that acts as an
     impermeable membrane.

      Shale has extremely low permeability and no filter cake is formed. The mud hydrostatic pressure
        is therefore directly in contact with the formation and will equalise with the pore pressure around
      the borehole. With time the hydrostatic pressure will gradually reach into the formation. This is
     known as pore pressure invasion.

     As the pore pressure invasion occurs the stress levels in the rock increase. If the stress levels
      reach a point whereby they are greater than the mud hydrostatic pressure, the rock will fail and
      fragment.

     Swabbing can often cause the rock to fail, as this lowers the mud hydrostatic pressure to a point
     where the rock stress is greater, initiating failure and fragmentation.

      Pressure invasion can be reduced by using a non water based mud.

4.4  Fluid Invasion and Hydration Stress
        All shales have the potential to hydrate, swell and disintegrate when in contact with water. The
     degree of hydration is determined by the charges present on the clay platelets.

    When pore pressure invasion occurs at the borehole wall, hydration can result in the failure of
      the shale, resulting in soft cuttings and clay balls.

      Hydration can be reduced by using salts (KCl) and / or polyglycerols or non water based muds.



                                   Page 4 of 5                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 276 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

5.0  Hydrates

      Hydrates are solid in nature, have a tendency to adhere to metal surfaces and have a lattice type
       structure in which gas molecules are completely enclosed within the crystal structure of frozen
      water.

      Hydrate formation is a function of pressure, temperature, gas composition and the aqueous
     phase composition.

      Natural gas molecules ranging from methane to isobutane, hydrogen sulphide and carbon
      dioxide can form hydrates.

     As water depths increase, so the likelihood of hydrates occurring increases due to higher
      pressures and lower seabed temperatures.

     The risk of hydrate formation should be minimised by using sufficiently inhibited mud systems
     and appropriate well control practices. In addition contingency plans should be established that
       outline the course of action to be taken if hydrates form.

5.1  Inhibition
       Inhibition of the mud system can be achieved using either thermodynamic or kinetic inhibitors.

     Thermodynamic inhibitors lower the activity level of the aqueous phase of the mud, suppressing
      the temperature required  for hydrate  stability at a given pressure. Typical thermodynamic
       inhibitors are salts, alcohols and glycols as shown below.

                         Salts                            Alcohols & Glycols
      Sodium Chloride                      Methanol
       Potassium Chloride                    Ethanol
       Calcium Chloride                        Glycerol
      Sodium Formate                       Ethylene Glycol
       Potassium Formate                    Propylene Glycol
      Sodium Bromide                        Polyalkylene Glycol
       Calcium Bromide
       Zinc Bromide

    Mud systems containing as much as 20 – 26% by weight of sodium chloride with polymers have
     been used in water depths greater than 7,500 ft to prevent hydrate formation.

     The use of kinetic inhibitors is still in it’s infancy. Essentially they slow down the rate of hydrate
      formation. Much is still to be learnt about how they work.

5.2  Well Control
      Hydrates are most likely to form whilst circulating out a gas influx through the choke and / or kill
        line. The increased velocity and expansion cooling in the lines or shut in periods with the gas
       influx close to seabed offer ideal conditions for hydrates to form.

      Obviously the best means of preventing hydrates forming in this instance is to avoid a gas influx.
     However contingency plans need to be in place should hydrates occur during a well control
      event.  This could include running coiled tubing or a second string of pipe inside the riser and
       circulating hot mud or heat generating chemicals at the top of the BOP.

5.3  Well Testing
     Always include a chemical injection sub, preferably below seabed, and inject methanol or
      ethanol to suppress the formation of hydrates.

    A ported slick joint is required to allow the chemical injection line to pass below the BOP. A
       suitable quantity of check valves should be installed above and below the ported slick joint.


                                   Page 5 of 5                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 277 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

                  SECTION 13
          ADVANCES IN TECHNOLOGY


     Contents
1.0    Horizontal Drilling                                                             2
2.0     Multilateral Well Drilling                                                        2
3.0    Slimhole and Coiled Tubing Drilling                                               3
  3.1  Slim-hole Drilling                                                             4
  3.2  Coiled Tubing Drilling                                                          5
4.0    Underbalanced Drilling                                                         5
5.0   MWD, LWD and Geo-Steering                                                  6
6.0    Coring                                                                      7





                                   Page 1 of 8                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 278 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


1.0  Horizontal Drilling

      Horizontal drilling has become common place during the last decade and now covers the range
       of well types noted above. In general, horizontal wells are drilled in development areas where the
      formations and pressures are known. However, there is an extra time element required to plan
     and design a horizontal well –  it will probably take twice as long to plan, design and order the
     equipment items and take approximately 50% extra time to drill. This is due to the additional cost
       of specialised equipment, safety constraints and time taken to achieve the build along the
       horizontal leg. Also, the longer the horizontal section that needs to be drilled, the lower the build
       rate. The majority of horizontal wells are drilled using medium radius builds.

       Additional factors need to be considered when drilling a horizontal well, especially the need for
      primary well control where there is a greater requirement to maintain constant bottom hole
      pressure during a well kill. Hole cleaning is also more difficult due to the presence of ‘dune build-
      up’ across the build sections, and can also increase the chances of swabbing. Horizontal drilling
     has become the norm in many areas where the requirement is to maximise production. The
      current distance records are hampered only by the equipment limits of the respective drilling
        rigs, especially the hoisting capacity and maximum flowrates and pump capacity.

      Definition
      Horizontal drilling is the process of directing a drill bit to follow a horizontal path, approximately
     90 degrees from vertical

     Purposes
     Maximise Production
     Enhance Secondary production
     Enhance ultimate recovery
     Reduce the number of wells required to develop a field

     Main Types
      Short Radius        (1 - 4 degs / 1 ft) shallow wells, can go from vertical - horizontal in 50ft
     Medium             (8 - 20 degs / 100 ft) Fractured reservoirs , need 300 ft to achieve build
     Long Radius        (2 - 8 degs / 100 ft) offshore, inaccessible reservoirs, need 1500 ft
       Ultra Short Radius  (almost no build)

      Applications:
      Tight reservoirs (permeability < 1 md)
      Fractured reservoirs
      Economically inaccessible reservoirs
     Heavy oil reservoirs
     Channel sand and reef core reservoirs
      Reservoirs with water / gas coning problems
       Stratified thin reservoirs

      Constraints :
      Cost
      Well spacing and lease restrictions
      Reservoir characteristics
      Production methods
     Amount of reach
      Rig constraints - lifting capability, pumps etc
       Availability of equipment - survey, coring, LWD tools etc
       Kick-off depth constraint
      Horizontal displacement constraints

2.0  Multilateral Well Drilling

      Rather than attempting to move hydrocarbons into vertical wellbores that may not be well
      positioned, the industry is now resorting to the use of horizontal, multi-lateral and multibranch
      wells that move the wellbore closer to the hydrocarbons in place.


                                   Page 2 of 8                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 279 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

       Multilateral well systems allow multiple producing wellbores to be drilled radially from a single
      section of a “parent” wellbore.  A major difference between this method and conventional
      sidetracking is that both the parent wellbore and the lateral extensions produce hydrocarbons.
     Because only a single vertical wellbore is required, multilateral well designs require less drilling
       time,  often have fewer equipment and  material  requirement, and increase hydrocarbon
      production.

       Multilateral drilling and completion methods have been practised since the mid-1940’s. The first
      applications were developed for mining, where multple bores were drilled from the parent shaft.
     These short, directional displacement bores were achieved with bent subs and the conventional
       rotary drilling technology of the time.  Several patents were issued covering multilateral or
      multibore tools and methods for use in mining (Gilbert, Rhem), but the technology was not
         initially used in the oil field.

      For years, hydraulic fracturing (although not really a competitor of modern multilateral drilling)
      provided large areal exposure between the well and the reservoir. However, with the significant
     advancements in horizontal drilling technology in the mid 1980’s and its evolution into multilateral
        drilling in the mid-1990’s, the performance of a vertical well with a hydraulic fracture can now be
       readily surpassed by a properly oriented horizontal or multilateral well in an areally anisotropic
       reservoir. Furthermore, horizontal well provide better results in reservoirs with large gas caps or
      water aquifers.

     The first extensive modern application of multilateral drilling was in the Austin Chalk formations
       in Texas during the late 1980’s.  High initial production rates and high decline rates required
      increased reservoir face exposure for the achievement of maximum production in the shortest
      possible time.

      Definition
     The  drilling of multiple drain holes from a single vertical, horizontal or inclined wellbore to
      improve hydrocarbon recovery and minimise the cost of dollar per barrel

     Purposes and drivers
      Cost
       Slot consideration
      Increase reserves
      Increase overall recovery
     Reduce the overall cost per barrel recovered
     Reduce the number of wells required for the reservoir
      Optimise secondary recovery
      Extend the life of the well

      Constraints
      Complexity - six different types
      Limited well applications at present - 18,000’MD
     Cementing and Junction stability
     Whipstock orientation
        Ability to re-enter both multi-laterals
    DRA required - including drilling, completion and reservoir
      Mechanical type
      Budgetary contingency
       select good candidates - better on multi-well programmes
     Lead Times - average time 6 months

3.0  Slimhole and Coiled Tubing Drilling

      Slimhole  drilling  is re-emerging technology expected  to make step-improvements  in  the
       efficiency and economy of well construction.  Wells are normally classified as slimholes  if the
      production interval is intentionally drilled with a bit diameter less than 4.75in (Hough, 1995).
     McCann et al (1993) suggested a “narrow gap” criterion (a drillstring-to-hole diameter ratio
      greater than 0.8) to distinguish slimhole from reduced-bore and conventional wells.  Either
       definition is acceptable.


                                   Page 3 of 8                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 280 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


     The primary slimhole drilling techniques include
      •       continuous boring
      •       conventional rotary drilling
      •      downhole-motor drilling, and
      •       coiled tubing drilling

     They share several mud related traits, including small circulating and pit volumes, small pumps
     and high frictional pressure gradients (inside the drillstring and/or annulus).  The key mud-
       related differences among the methods are the rotary speed of the drillstring and the annular
      gap, both of which can vary widely.

      Continuous coring, adapted from the hard-rock mining industry, requires the use of solids-free
        drilling fluids. High speed rotation (up to 1000 rpm) creates extraordinary centrifugal forces that
     can cause mud solids to cake on the inside walls of the drill rod (drillstring) and interfere with
       wireline recovery of the core barrel.  Innovative mud formulations based on formate brines
       (primarily potassium formate, up to 1.6sg) have provided the best results (Downs, 1993). High
      density  brines made  with  formate  salts  are  non-hazardous and  compatible  with  both
      conventional  oilfield polymers and  formation waters  containing  sulfates and carbonates.
      Continuous coring operation also typically use very narrow annular gaps, some less than 0.25in.
      Annular pressure  losses, which can  uncharacteristically exceed  drill-rod pressure losses,
     become  critical for lost circulation and well control concerns.  Pipe rotation also increases
      annular pressure losses (McCann et al., 1993). The resulting high overbalance may contribute
       to formation damage.

      Rotary speeds for conventionally drilled slimholes (Sagot and Dapuis, 1994) are considerably
      lower (usually less than 350 rpm), minimal for downhole motor drilling, and non-existent for
       coiled tubing drilling.  Ultra-low solids content is not required, although solids (expecially fines)
      should be minimised and carefully controlled for maximum performance.

       Different types of drilling fluids have been used successfully for slimholes wells.  However,
      biopolymer/brine fluids have distinct advantages.  Brines provide solids free density, inhibition
     and improved temperature  stability.   Biopolymers such as xanthan and welan gum are
      compatible with brines and provide excellent  viscosity, suspension and drag reduction  in
       turbulent flow (at low solids content). Starch or starch derivatives can be added to control fluid
      loss and acid-soluble, sized calcium carbonate can provide bridging, if required. Goodrich et al.
      (1996) reported successful use of solids free xanthan/brine drilling fluids for a coiled tubing
       project in Prudhoe Bay, Alaska.  Claims include increased horizontal reach, improved hole
      cleaning, better formation stability, lower pump pressures, and reduced pipe sticking tendencies.
       Fluid loss is controlled by penetration of a highly viscous filtrate into the formation rather than a
      conventional filter cake.

3.1  Slim-hole Drilling

      Definition
      Slim hole drilling is defined as holes drilled with bit sizes < 7” diameter while a Slim hole
      completion is one with the production casing size less than 4 inches diameter.

      Applications
      Exploratory wells
     Deepening existing wells
      Horizontal and Multi-lateral wells
      Wells with low production

      Benefits
     Lower cost option (smaller equipment size, less materials, less man power, less space)
     Less environmental impact
     Less risk from a cost viewpoint




                                   Page 4 of 8                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 281 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      Limitations
     Equipment availability and loading limits (also rig equipment)
      Well control
      Fishing tools and ability to do remedial work
      Limited to shorter wells

3.2  Coiled Tubing Drilling

      Coiled Tubing consists of:
      •       Coiled Tubing
      •      Tubing Injector Head
      •       Coiled Tubing Reel
      •      Wellhead Blowout Preventer Stack
      •       Hydraulic power-drive unit
      •       Control console
      •      Downhole mud motors and MWD Tools

      Constraints
      Coiled Tubing size (1 - 3 inches in diameter)
      Shallow wells and less than 8-1/2” hole size
      Re-entry hole sizes are limited to < 2-3/8”
       Multilateral holes < 3-3/4”
      Limited hydraulics for annular hole cleaning
      Buckling limits
      Fatigue life limits

     Advantages
      Safety
       Efficiency
      Small Rigs - much less expensive
     Fewer personnel
     Less impact on the environment
     Lower overall drilling cost

4.0  Underbalanced Drilling

      For the drilling of fractured chalk, limestone or depleted reservoirs, a very low solids drill-in fluid
        is preferred because the fluid that invades can be removed by production. High solids loading in
       fluids can cause mud that enters the fracture system to “gel up”. Gelled mud may be impossible
       to remove. Some fractured limestones or chalks also have a low matrix permeability so that
        fluid loss can occur from the fractures. These formations are sometimes drilled underbalanced
      with solids-free brines.  Underbalanced drilling permits oil to be produced as the well is being
        drilled, and the oil is separated from the solids-free drill-in fluid at the surface.

      Definition
     Underbalanced drilling is a process where the well bore drilling fluid pressure gradient is less
      than the formation pressure gradient which is being drilled.

     Requirements
      Special rotating BOP stack or coiled tubing for drilling
      Surface separating equipment (four phase separation)
       Drilling fluid whose weight can be reduced by injecting Nitrogen gas or air.
      Preferably a closed flow circulating system

      Applications
      Pressure depleted zones
    Weak and permeable formations
      Formations susceptible to high production damage



                                   Page 5 of 8                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 282 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      Benefits
     Reduced formation damage
      Faster Rate of Penetration (ROP)
     Can eliminate stuck pipe
     Can eliminate mud losses in highly
     permeable formations
     Improved formation evaluation

5.0 MWD, LWD and Geo-Steering

    No other technology used in well construction has evolved more rapidly than measurement-
       while-drilling (MWD), logging-while-drilling (LWD), and geosteering.  Early in the history of the
        oilfield, drillers and geologists often debated environmental and mechanical conditions at the drill
         bit.     It was not  until advances  in  electronic components, materials science and battery
      technology made it technically feasible to make measurements at the bit and transmit them back
       to the surface that the questions posed by pioneering  drillers and geologists began to be
      answered.

     The  first measurements to be introduced commercially were directional, and almost  all the
      applications took place in offshore, directionally drilled wells.   It was easy to demonstrate the
      savings in rig time that could be achieved by substituting measurements taken while drilling and
      transmitted over the technology of the day.  Single shots (downhole orientation taken by an
      instrument that measures azimuth or inclination at only one point) often took many hours of rig
      time since they were run to bottom on slick line then retrieved.  As long as MWD achieved
       certain minimum reliability targets, it was less costly than single shots, and it gained popularity
      accordingly. Achieving those reliability targets in the harsh downhole environment is one of the
      dual challenges of MWD and LWD technology. The other challenge is to provide wireline quality
     measurements.

       In the early 1980’s, simple qualitative measurements of formation parameters were introduced,
      often based upon methods proven by early wireline technology.  Geologists and drilling staff
     used short, normal resisitivity and natural gamma ray measurements to select coring points and
      casing points.  However, limitations in these measurements restricted them from replacing
       wireline for quantitative formation evaluation.

      Late in 1980’s, the  first rigorously quantitative measurements of formation parameters were
     made.  Initially, the measurements were stored in tool memory, but soon the resistivity, neutron
       porosity and gamma density measurements were transmitted to the surface in real time.  In
       parallel  with  qualitative measurements and  telemetry, widespread use  of MWD systems
     (combined with the development of steerable mud motors) made horizontal drilling more feasible
      and, therefore, more common.

     Soon, planning and steering horizontal wells on the basis of a geological model became
      inadequate. Even with known lithology of offset wells and well defined seismic data, the geology
       of a  directional  well  often  varied  significantly over  the  horizontal  interval  that  steering
      geometrically (by using directional measurements) was quickly observed to be inaccurate and
       ineffective.  In response to these poor results from geometric steering, the first instrumented
      motors were designed and deployed in the early 1990’s.  Recent developments in MWD and
    LWD technology include sensors that measure the formation acoustic velocity and provide
       electrical images of dipping formations.

      Definition
       Capability to drill, log and navigate in long and medium radius wells, to stay in the pay-zone,
      reduce hole exposure and improve deviation control.

      Applications
     Long deviated and ERD wells
      Wells with thin or disjointed reservoir sections
      Designer profile wells - ie, Horizontal and Multi-lateral wells
      Wells with small, faulted areas of production



                                   Page 6 of 8                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 283 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      Benefits
     Can drill, log and navigate in long and medium radius wells
     Can change hole trajectory while rotating - full 3D control
    Now have FE and MWD Tools available
     Can delineate Reservoirs in much shorter time scale
      Higher value wellbores - able to stay in the pay-zone
     Can reduce hole exposure and improve deviation control.
     Reduced number of wells

       In horizontal wells, when using FEMWD Tools, need to consider
     Bending limits of the tools
      Position of sensors from the bit
     Depth of Investigation of the sensors
      Environmental Restrictions - drilling fluid etc
      Real Time Vs Memory Data





         NaviDrill           Flex Sub  Top Stabilizer    RNT          Standard AKO
       Power Section




                                                 Geosteering Module        Steerable Assemly





6.0  Coring

      Detailed information form target formations is essential of both primary and secondary recovery
      programs. Core samples can yield this critical subsurface information.  With quality cores, oil
     companies can more fully understand formation characteristics and more efficiently achieve
      production objectives.

      High quality cores provide the most accurate lithology, porosity and permeability information for
       building the geologic model of the reservoir. Such models are important tools, for example, in
      evaluating horizontal and vertical permeability.

     Core samples can provide the petrophysicist and the reservoir engineer with accurate saturation,
       wettability and electrical properties of the formation.  When secondary displacement is the
       objective, core sample data are essential.

     Core quality is the key.  The sample must be obtained without altering its native (or in-situ)
       properties.  Informed application of specialised tools and techniques can produce quality core
      samples.

      Coring technology advances over the past few years includes:
      Coring while drilling (BHI Coredrill)
     Low Invasion coring
     Gel coring
       Anti-whirl technology


                                   Page 7 of 8                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 284 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
               DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

High pressure coring





                              Page 8 of 8                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 285 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                     DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

                   SECTION 14

               SUBSEA SYSTEMS

     Contents

1   Introduction                                                                  2
2   Current Subsea Developments                                                   2
  2.1  FPSO                                                                   2
  2.2   Monohull ship-shape.                                                       3
  2.3   Semi-submersible structures                                                 3
  2.4  SPAR system                                                             3
  2.5   Tension Leg Platform                                                       3
3   Subsea Tie-Back Methods                                                       3
  3.1    Introduction                                                               3
  3.2    Flexible flowlines/pipelines                                                   4
  3.3    Rigid risers                                                               4
  3.4    Flexible risers                                                             4
  3.5   Catenary risers                                                            5
  3.6    Pipeline bundles                                                           5
  3.7   Connection methods                                                        5
4   Subsea template and manifold options                                             5
  4.1   Conventional template                                                      5
  4.2   Expandable moonpool installed templates                                       6
  4.3    Clusters and satellites                                                       6
  4.4    Intervention                                                               6
  4.5   Deepwater Options                                                         7
  4.6   Guideline and Guidelineless Systems                                          7
  4.7   Template Design                                                           7
5   Subsea Wellhead Systems                                                      7
  5.1    Introduction                                                               7
  5.2   Design Issues                                                             8
  5.3   Wellhead Components                                                      8
  5.4   Temporary Guide Base (TGB)                                                8
  5.5    Drilling Guide Base                                                         8
  5.6   Conductor Housing                                                         9
  5.7    18-3/4” Wellhead Housing                                                   9
  5.8   Casing Hanger                                                            10
  5.9   Casing Hanger Pack-off Assemblies                                           10
  5.10  Bore Protectors and Wear Bushings                                           10
  5.11  Corrosion Cap                                                            11
  5.12  Running, Retrieving and Testing Tools                                         11
6   Tubing Suspension Equipment                                                   11
  6.1   Tubing Hanger                                                            11
  6.2   Tubing Hanger Running and Orientation Tool (THROT)                            12
  6.3    Horizontal Tree Landing String                                               13
  6.4   Emergency Recovery Tools                                                  15
  6.5   Tubing Hanger Handling and Test Tool                                         15
  6.6  BOP Orientation Pin                                                        15
7   Subsea Xmas Tree System                                                     16
  7.1    Control Systems                                                           16
  7.2   Master control station (MCS)                                                 17
  7.3   Larger systems                                                           18
  7.4   Actuators                                                                19
8   Diving Methods Vs ROV Use                                                    19





                                   Page 1 of 21                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 286 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                     DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


1    Introduction

     The exploration for oil and gas offshore began in the late 1800’s and in 1896, an offshore well
     was drilled off the coast of California. In 1938, the discovery of the Creole field 2 km from the
      coast of Louisiana  in the Gulf of Mexico heralded the beginning of the move into open,
      unprotected waters. In this instance a 20m by 90m drilling platform was secured to a foundation
       of timber piles set in 4m of water. Typically, these pioneering offshore wells utilised piers to
      create a platform above the prospect which thus enabled them to drill vertical wells into the
       target.

     As the search for oil and gas reserves has continued to intensify, so exploration has moved into
      increasingly deeper waters. The first subsea well was completed by Shell in 1960 and came on
      stream in January 1961. This marked both the successful conclusion of many years of R&D and
      the beginning of a new era  in subsea production. Nowadays, subsea completions are a
     commonplace option and  it is the mode of production that is changing. Originally, such wells
     would have been tied back directly to a platform but now alternatives exist and can be ranked for
     any particular field depending on cost and water depth.

2   Current Subsea Developments


      Current subsea development options include:
      •   Tension leg platforms without storage (TLP)
      •   Floating production vessels without storage (FPV).
      •   Floating storage units (FSU)
      •   Floating production storage and offloading vessel (FPSO).
      •  SPAR buoys for storage or production and storage.
      •  Deep draft semi-submersibles with storage and offloading (DDSS).

2.1 FPSO
     The idea of FPSO’s has been around for many years and the concept has been utilised since
      the 70’s when conversions from existing tankers was the norm. In the late 80’s, the Petrojarl
      heralded the first of the turret systems and was marketed as a testing and early production
      system. Since then, various turret designs have appeared and include those on the Gryphon,
      Uisge Gorm, Captain, Anasuria and Foinavon.

      Definition:
      Floating – the body is in equilibrium when floating. This excludes TLP’s which use buoyancy to
      maintain equilibrium. The unit must have a displacement and buoyancy compatible with its
      payload requirement, a form compatible with its station keeping requirement and be able to
      provide a safe, stable platform as a working environment.
      Production – the vessel could contain primary and secondary processing equipment to treat live
       well fluids eg oil/ water separation. These are field specific and can range from a single stage
      separation to a  full blown separation, compression and injection system with  its associated
     power requirements.
      Storage – able to store significant quantities of oil until it can be removed by shuttle tanker. This
      could be due to the lack of an effective export option in the vicinity other than a shuttle tanker or
       to the poor quality of the crude which would incur a high pipeline tariff. Note that lack of sufficient
      storage could be detrimental in the long term if production has to be halted because of a log-jam
       in the export route (planned shut down excepted).
      Offloading – contains a means by which oil can be transferred from storage to either a shuttle
      tanker or alternative export source. Direct unloading is permissible only if there are no weather
       implications i.e. the FPSO can weather vane. If that is the case, then a remote loading buoy
    may be required. Such remote buoys would include:

      •      Surface loading buoys (CALM systems)
      •      Loading towers
      •      Sub-surface buoys (UKOLS, STL systems)


                                   Page 2 of 21                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 287 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                     DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      •        Trailing hoses (surface or submerged)

     The evolution of the FPSO has resulted in there now being three generic types recognised:
       1.  Monohull ship-shaped structures.
       2.  Semi-submersible structures
       3.  Spar structures

2.2  Monohull ship-shape.
     These are by far the most common and evolved from the modified tanker parentage. Their size
        is dictated by the storage capacity required and the sea keeping capabilities. Consequently, the
       available deck space for processing and utility equipment  is usually more than adequate. For
      operating in benign areas, a box shape could provide an acceptable solution whilst in more
      severe environments, a longer, thinner vessel would be required.

     Because of the large lateral excursions coupled with the need to be able to weathervane, these
       units can only be used with subsea completions, wet trees and are connected to the wells with a
       flexible riser system. Drilling and intervention activities are not practical from such systems.

2.3  Semi-submersible structures
     These encompass all conventional and deep draught designs. The former includes all design
      types which are capable of being moored with a catenary system in water depths in excess of
     70m. Production to these semi submersible designs requires dynamic risers due to the deck
      motions being too great to allow surface wellheads. There are various flexible configurations
       available for connecting the seabed flow-lines to the production facilities on the rig. The number
       of risers is not seen to be a severe constraint for semi-submersibles, the deck load capacity
      being the more critical factor. Drilling and intervention activities can be conducted from the
      vessel if located directly above the wellheads.

2.4 SPAR system
     The SPAR is essentially a vertically moored hull of around 200m in height and up to 40m in
      diameter. Mooring  is usually provided by a catenary mooring system that  restricts vessel
     movements and permits the use of rigid risers and dry trees. The risers are supported either by
      hydraulic tensioners or buoyancy modules. As the SPAR can carry solid risers, then it can also
     be equipped with drilling and intervention equipment. While the design has already been used
      extensively for storage purposes (e.g.Brent Spar), it is now being considered as able to provide
     a production option as well e.g. Neptune Field for Oryx (Kerr McGee).

2.5  Tension Leg Platform
      This is essentially a vertically tethered platform. The platform is floated over the wellhead area
     and tethered at each corner by tubular members that are attached to piles. When ballasted up,
      the buoyancy in the vessel is sufficient to place the tubulars in tension. This design effectively
      eliminates vessel movement and enables the use of rigid risers and dry trees. The TLP, once
     moored, effectively behaves as a platform.  It differs only in that, for drilling and intervention
      purposes, the rigid production riser and surface tree are replaced with a drilling riser and subsea
    BOP and the work conducted as if on a semi-submersible.

3   Subsea Tie-Back Methods

3.1  Introduction
     Subsea production systems can be connected to the host facilities using conventional steel
       pipelines and in-field flowlines. For the steel pipelines, there are three methods of laying them:

      •   Conventional S-lay
      •   J-lay
      •   Laying from a reel ship



                                   Page 3 of 21                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 288 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                     DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      Conventional S-lay is the oldest method of installing a subsea pipeline offshore. Lengths are
     welded together horizontally and launched over the stern of a ship over a long stinger while the
      ship “crawls” forward on anchors or using thrusters (DP). Used typically in shallow to medium
      waters,   it  thus  avoids  subjecting  the  pipeline  to  excessive  stresses  or having  to use
      unacceptably heavy (thick) pipe. This method is quick but  it does have limitations dictated by
      water depth and line pipe size. It is also labour intensive i.e. costly.

       J-lay involves welding pipe in a vertical orientation thus eliminating the need for a stinger. The
      advantages of this are that pipe can be laid in deeper waters and a greater selection of vessels
     can be used. The down side is that it is a slower process than J-lay due to the vertical welding
       position.

      Laying from a reelship necessitates pipe to be pre-fabricated in a linear onshore facility and then
     wound onto a  reel. This can then be loaded onto a specially adapted vessel. Any pipe
      deformation while being spooled onto the reel is removed during the laying process by passing
      the pipe through a straightening machine. Any welding is conducted beforehand on shore thus
     making this process a more cost effective one. The laying of the pipe is much faster as a result
       of this but it is restricted to pipe  diameters of 16” or less. This, however, covers most subsea
      developments.

      Regardless of laying method, all pipelines must be able to withstand the stresses encountered
      during laying and the thermal expansion forces during production. The latter is dealt with by
      provision of expansion spools in the form of expansion loops and burial of the pipeline to restrain
      against upheaval buckling, provide thermal insulation and protect against fishing activities.

      Normally, a pipeline is installed by laying from one target area to another. The pipeline ends are
      normally terminated in the form of pipeline end modules (PLEM’s) which consist of some form of
      skid (with or without isolation valves) supporting the end of the pipeline and its termination above
      the mudline. The actual pipeline mouth should be equipped with either a flange or clamp
      connector to assist in connecting to whatever facility – tree, manifold or platform interface. A
      survey then determines the actual shape of the tie-in spool required to connect the pipeline end
      with the “host facility”  . This can then be fabricated onshore and fitted with minimal offshore
      modifications. Commonly, these connections used to be made up with the assistance of divers
      but are more commonly now being engineered to allow hook-up with ROV assistance, vital as
      the industry moves into the deeper water areas.

3.2  Flexible flowlines/pipelines
       Flexible pipelines are basically thermoplastic pipes with helically wound steel strips incorporated
       to increase strength. Advantages over conventional line pipe:
        •   Not subjected to the same laying stresses since flexible
        •   Tie-in tolerances at the ends are greater since the need for tie-in spools is eliminated.
        •   Thermal stresses are accommodated by the flexible nature of the pipe.

     However, there are temperature limitations (112°C) and size limitations (16”) at present.

3.3  Rigid risers
    On fixed platforms, they are clamped to the legs and connected to import/export flowlines on the
      seabed. A variation of this is the J-tube which is a rigid riser incorporating a 90°bend on the
      seabed. A smaller diameter flowline can be pulled through this to the platform top sides.
     They also occur on TLP’s and SPARS where heave and large excursions have been eliminated.

3.4  Flexible risers
       Flexible risers are used  for connecting flowlines to semi-submersible production systems,
     FPSO’s or other floating systems such as loading buoys which are subject to significant wave
     and weather-induced motions. They are similar to flexible pipelines in construction but the steel
      armouring is specifically designed to withstand the dynamic and fatigue stresses induced by the
      vessel motions. They are normally attached to a riser base at the seabed which is used both as
     an anchor and as a support to mount the connectors.


                                   Page 4 of 21                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 289 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                     DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

     Buoyancy aids are normally installed at some mid-water depth which creates a riser with an “S”
      shape. These provide sufficient slack in the riser to allow for the most extreme vessel motions
     and a means of controlling the slack.

3.5  Catenary risers
      Steel catenary risers provide an alternative to the flexible riser option. These are steel risers
      which hang vertically from a floating vessel and take up a natural “J” form at the seabed. As the
      vessel heaves, the riser  lifts off and touches down on the seabed continuously varying the
      contact point. The pipeline has a thicker wall and additional reinforcement throughout the touch
     down zone to resist any abrasion.

3.6  Pipeline bundles
     These comprise the flowlines, umbilicals cables etc bundled inside an external carrier which can
      also be filled with an insulating material. Once fabricated and tested (in the UK, sites at Tain and
      Wick), the bundles are launched across the beach and towed out to location. Currently, the
     maximum length practical for towing purposes is deemed to be about 8kms. Longer lengths of
        final bundled lines necessitate linking series of individual bundled lines once on location.

3.7  Connection methods
     The  simplest form  of connecting  pipeline  or  spool ends onto manifolds  is using  diver
       intervention. However, the current trend is now to move to remote activated systems such as the
       pull in systems utilising a winch to draw the pipeline/spool end towards the manifold and then
     making up the two mating hubs with an ROV (Remotely Operated Vehicle) activated clamp. A
       variation would be to tie the rope end onto the structure and an ROV onto the pipeline end and
      allow the ROV to winch the pipeline end into position.

     As an alternative to pull in methods, the tie-in can be made using a vertical connection system.
      Thus, an upwards facing termination hub is fitted to the structure whilst the pipeline/spool end
     has a corresponding mating hub. The pipeline/spool end is “dropped” onto the upwards facing
     hub and the connection secured with an ROV installed clamp.

4   Subsea template and manifold options


4.1  Conventional template
      Conventional subsea templates comprise a seabed mounted structure secured by suitable
     means dependent on the soil conditions. The functions of the structure include acting as a
        drilling template, providing support for the Xmas trees, enable commingling of production
      streams, providing an injection manifold along with all the connections systems, controls and
      chemical injection equipment. The template may be designed to protect equipment from trawling
       activities and dragging anchors depending on the level of fishing activity. It will certainly provide
     some dropped objects cover probably restricted to lighter items such as drill pipe sections. This
        will probably be in the form of hinged panels that can be raised by either ROV or Remotely
     Operated Tools (ROT) to give access for intervention work.

     The well bay isolation valves  in a production or injection manifold are remotely operated
      hydraulic actuated valves with ROV over-ride as with the Xmas tree valves. A test header may
      also be included on the manifold to enable individual wells to be isolated and the production
      stream conveyed back to a test separator on the host facility via a specific test flowline. A
      cheaper testing option would involve the use of a multiphase meter sited on the manifold and
       suitable pipework to enable the flow from individual wells to be routed through it thus eliminating
      the need for a costly test flow line. Well testing is a necessary, regular activity during production
     and is used to aid reservoir management and maximise recovery.

    When two of more wells are producing into the same manifold, the wellhead pressures must be
      balanced to prevent cross-flow occurring. To control individual wellhead pressures, chokes are
       installed on the flowpath from each well and are capable of adjusting the pressure in a series of


                                   Page 5 of 21                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 290 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                     DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

        finite steps. The temperatures and pressures of the individual flows are constantly monitored by
      the production control system both upstream and downstream of the chokes which can either be
     mounted on the trees or on the manifold.
     The largest conventional template installed is the Saga Snore template in Norway which has a
     20 well capacity and weighed 2,22tonnes.

4.2  Expandable moonpool installed templates
     The original template and manifold designs have been modified recently to provide equipment
       that can be installed through the moonpool on a semi-submersible rig thus eliminating the cost
       of an additional heavy  lift vessel. The most successful design to date is the HOST template
     system (Hinge Over Subsea Template) manufactured by FMC Kongsberg. This comprises a
       central rectangular section on which a number of “wing” sections (usually four) are hinged. The
      wings are hinged  vertically during deployment through the moonpool.  After securing the
       structure onto  its  pre-installed foundation, the wings are allowed  to  fall outwards  into a
       horizontally hinged position, each one forming a well bay guide. The wells are then drilled and
    Xmas trees run and installed in the normal manner. A manifold module can then be run and
       installed on the central bay and the Xmas tree flowlines hooked up, horizontally for the HOST
     system or vertically for similar concepts.

4.3  Clusters and satellites
     As an alternative to the template system (conventional or HOST type where wells, trees and
      manifolds are all contained within a single structure), a well cluster can be utilised. This consists
       of a central manifold containing the well bay control valves, the umbilical termination unit and
       control and chemical distribution systems. It may also contain the choke valves and Xmas tree
       control modules. The actual wells are removed from the manifold, the distance being anything
     up to several kilometres which permits smaller, lighter structures to be used and simplifies the
      tree/manifold hook up i.e. greater tolerance due to greater distance apart. This type of well
      configuration also has more flexibility since wells may be sited at the optimum locations rather
      than simply in a single drilling centre. The disadvantages of clusters are that they require more
     subsea connections, there are in-field jumpers and umbilicals to lay and more rig moves may be
      required.

      For both templates and clusters,  it is usual to incorporate dual production headers joined by a
      pigging loop which will permit “round trip” pigging i.e. launching a pig from the host facility down
     one pipeline and returning up the other.
      Note: A pig is a device propelled through a pipeline by fluid pressure to carry out various
      inspection and maintenance tasks in the pipeline. These include corrosion monitoring and
      scraping scale/wax deposits from off the pipeline.

4.4  Intervention
      Both template and cluster systems require careful consideration regarding intervention and
      repair/maintenance  activities  during  life  of  field.  Although  reliability  of components has
      increased, failure resulting in the loss of production, however temporary, cannot be tolerated.
      Consequently, a great many of the more vulnerable components have inherent redundances
        built in. Other components are designed to be easily retrievable – for instance control modules
     and multi-phase meters can be retrieved and replaced by diver, ROV or ROT.
      Other components liable to failure such as choke valves and wellbay control valves are available
      with inserts which can be removed and replaced by special tooling without recovering the whole
      valve body.
        All remotely operated valves should be fitted with ROV overrides so that, in the event of failure of
      the remote control system, production can be maintained by ROV intervention. As a last resort,
      the complete manifold system should be designed such  that   it can be retrieved without
       disturbing the trees should component failure warrant it.

        All  of these  intervention  activities and  their access requirements need  to be given  full
      consideration during the design of templates and manifolds and they should also be proven
      during SIT (System Integration Testing) onshore.



                                   Page 6 of 21                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 291 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                     DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

4.5  Deepwater Options
     The basic options described above are all applicable to deep water developments. The chief
      differences lie in the installation and in the operational/intervention  methods and techniques.
     The diver intensive options become unacceptable due to risk and technical difficulty.

4.6  Guideline and Guidelineless Systems
       In water depths up to around 500-600m, the accepted practice is to run subsea equipment on
      tensioned guidelines acting as a coarse orientation tool by being attached to guideposts on the
     seabed and to the rig at their upper end. The equipment being run is skidded into the moonpool
     and the four guide wires are latched into the guide funnels and frame members. The equipment
     can then be lowered to a depth just above the seabed structure on slack guide wires with the rig
        off station to minimise any dropped object risk. The guide wires can then be tensioned as the rig
        is moved over the structure and the equipment can be landed out on the guideposts.

       In water depths beyond 500-600m, the guideline system becomes impractical due to the
      excessive lengths and increased risk of entanglement. Instead, equipment is run fitted with large
      diameter entry funnels and matching re-entry cones either funnel-up or funnel-down irrespective
       of whether the rig is moored using anchors or dynamic positioning. Both parts to be mated are
      equipped with transponders and final positioning is undertaken by matching the signals. Coarse
       orientation may be effected initially using ROV assistance.

4.7  Template Design
     The template must fulfil the following functions:
      •   Provide a solid foundation for the equipment to be installed and be capable of withstanding
              all imposed loads:
                 Static loads
             Dynamic installation loads
                   Drilling loads static and dynamic
             Dropped objects loads
              Snagging loads normally 60T – the breaking load of a normal trawl.
      •   Provide protection for the installed equipment from impact due to dropped or dragged
           objects.
      •   Provide access to permit  all routine operational, intervention, repair and maintenance
            activities by whatever means – diver, ROV, ROT.
      •     It must be as lightweight and compact as possible to permit installation by the smallest
          possible vessel if not the drilling rig itself.

5   Subsea Wellhead Systems

5.1  Introduction
     The subsea wellhead provides a seabed location for suspending and sealing the wellbore casing
       strings. Originally, they were designed around a two stack system i.e. able to work with 21-1/4”
      2000psi and 13-5/8” 10,000psi BOP stacks at different stages in a well. Most modern subsea
      wellheads are now designed around the use of a single 18-3/4” BOP stack rated at up to
      15,000psi.
     These wellheads should be able to withstand the loads imposed by the BOP’s and their
      associated risers. They should also enable a drilling guide base to be replaced by a production
      guide base thus converting the well to a producer.

         Initially, the basic wellhead component serves to guide equipment to the correct seabed location
       via guide wires. Then, after drilling the top hole, the 30” housing on top of the cemented 30”
      conductor pipe provides a structural foundation. The 18-3/4” high pressure housing run on top of
      the 20” casing allows  drilling  to continue through higher pressure regimes with  full mud
       circulation and pressure control. Subsequent casing strings are run through the BOP and landed
        off in the wellhead one on top of the other as the casing sizes diminish. Interfaces exist between
      the BOP hydraulic connector and 18-3/4” housing and between the casing hangers and the
      casing tubulars. The correct profile must be machined on the outside of the housing to suit the


                                   Page 7 of 21                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 292 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                     DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

    BOP connector and the correct thread cut in the casing hangers to suit the casing. A compatible
      connector and extension must also be welded to the 20” and 30” housings.

5.2  Design Issues
     The major issue is the actual casing scheme to be run. However, no matter what scheme is
       ultimately chosen, the basic wellhead parts – hanger and pack-off interface – will be of standard
      design. At an early stage, consideration should be given to suspending the total casing string
      weight in the wellhead housing along with the simultaneous application of full bore pressure end
       load. At 15,000psi, there can be a problem with the limited shoulder available at the bottom of
      the housing to take this load. In some cases, a hardened insert is used to distribute the load into
     a greater area to reduce the bearing stress. In other cases, load rings are used to transmit the
      load from each hanger into grooves in the wellhead housing thus reducing the bottom shoulder
       load.

     Subsea wellhead equipment and tools are designed according to API 17D specifications. Whilst
      basic dimensions, performance requirements and pressure ratings are determined by API
      standards, the design and operation of running tools is at the manufacturers discretion. There is,
       therefore, a wide variety of different tool designs to accomplish the same task.

      Standard subsea wellhead system pressure ratings are 2000, 5000, 10,000 or 15,000psi. Most
      wellheads are now rated at 15,000psi although they may be used much less tan this.  All
      pressure containing and controlling parts are designed to meet all material requirements of
    NACE Standard MR-01-75 (Sulphide stress cracking resistant metallic materials for  oilfield
      equipment). The wellhead housing, casing hanger bodies and casing hanger pack-off are
      classed as pressure containing equipment.

5.3  Wellhead Components


5.4  Temporary Guide Base (TGB)
     The TGB provides a guide template for drilling conductor hole and stabbing the conductor
      housing. It compensates for misalignment due to irregular seabed conditions and also provides
     a support for the drilling guide base. It also provides an anchor point for the guide lines.
          It is “temporary” in as much as  it serves to provide initial guidance until the drilling guide base
     goes down. After that, it merely serves to anchor the guide wires. It is also “permanent” in that it
        is not recovered after the well has been abandoned.

      Design loads include ballast, guide line tension and the weight of the 30” conductor. Any soil
      reaction load should also be catered for. Typically, the TGB should be capable of supporting a
     minimum static load of 175,000lbs on the central cone while the TGB is supported at 90° on four
       locations. These must be a minimum at a minimum radial distance of 62” from the centre.

5.5  Drilling Guide Base
      This provides entry to the well prior to the BOP being installed and, along with the guide posts,
      gives guidance for running the BOP or Xmas tree. It provides structural support, final alignment
       for the wellhead system and a seat and lock down for the conductor housing. Earlier guide
     bases used to be permanently attached to the 30” housing. Current designs allow the DGB to be
      recovered from the wellhead and replaced with a production guide base if required.

      Design loads include the weight of the conductor housing and pipe, flowline pull-in, connection or
       installation loads and environmental loads. Typically, the DGB must be capable of supporting a
     minimum static load of 175,000lbs at its centre while being supported at its outer edges.

     Guide posts must be designed and manufactured out of 8-5/8” OD pipe and have a minimum
      length 8ft. They must be on a 6ft radius from the centre of the DGB and be replaceable in the
        field. Most are now designed to allow ROV’s to perform this task and use with a TGB means that
      the posts  will have to be slotted to take the guide lines. The guide base  itself  is usually
      constructed from “I” beam or box section and suitably painted.


                                   Page 8 of 21                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 293 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                     DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


5.6  Conductor Housing
     The conductor housing is attached to the top of the conductor pipe (usually 30” OD) either
      mechanically or butt welded. The outer profile is machined to accept a drilling or retrievable
      guide base. The lower part of the housing contains ports to allow cement to escape from within
      the 30”/20” annulus. Internally, the housing is machined to accept both a 30” housing running
       tool and the 18-3/4” high pressure housing.

      Design loads include wellhead loads, riser forces, DGB loads, environmental loads pressure
      loads and thermal loads. The housing should be capable of supporting a minimum static load of
      175,000lbs and have a minimum working pressure rating of 1,000psi.

       In general, the conductor housing has a 30” nominal OD with typical OD of 37.38” and ID of
       26.2”. The 30” nominal OD is usually standard due to rotary table constraints. When selecting
      the ID of the housing, bit gauge diameter for the following section plus 1/8” clearance should be
      allowed.

5.7  18-3/4” Wellhead Housing
     The wellhead housing seats within the conductor housing and supports subsea equipment
     (BOP, tree, riser) and the subsequent casing strings and tubing hanger. The BOP latches on to
      the top of the housing using a standard wellhead connector e.g.H4. The wellhead housing
      should also be able to accept a tubing hanger and either a conventional or horizontal tree.
     The central outer section of the wellhead housing features a lock down mechanism that secures
           it to the conductor housing. Above this, there is an upwards facing profile with a special gasket
      pocket to create a secure pressure seal with the BOP.

     The subsea wellhead housing is treated as a piece of pressure controlling equipment and the
      design loads considered include riser forces, BOP loads, subsea tree loads, pressure, radial
      loads, thermal loads, environmental loads, flowline loads, suspended casing loads, conductor
      housing reactions,, tubing hanger reactions and hydraulic connector clamping forces.

      Standard wellheads are rated at between 2.5 and 3.0 million ft-lbs in bending and as much as 7
       million lbs in tension although these limits can be exceeded by manufacturers. Bending loads
      are governed by the wall thickness of the high pressure housing at the connection to the BOP
     and how the high/low pressure wellheads interact together. A standard wellhead system will
     have a high pressure housing with an OD of about 27”. To increase the bending load capacity,
      the high pressure housing OD can be increased in size (OD up to 30”) while the high/low
      pressure wellhead housing interface is strengthened.

      For deepwater application, the bending rating has been increased to as much as 7 million ft-lbs.
     The high/low pressure housings can also be rigidly locked together to minimise any damage
      from vortex induced vibration derived from high currents impacting on the riser.

     The bending strength of wellhead connectors  is dependent on the axial load and internal
      pressure. Most standard wellhead connectors are limited to 3 - 4,000,000 ft-lbs although some
      suppliers can supply connectors for higher bending loads with capacities up to 7 million ft-lbs
      bending load.

     The pressure tight seal between the housing and BOP is critical. A proprietary gasket is used
     and the seal surface on the housing is usually inlaid with Inconel 625 corrosion resistant alloy.
     There are no penetrations within the body of the wellhead housing. The base is butt welded onto
      the surface casing and both the 30” and 20” casings provide structural support. The minimum
      bore of the wellhead housing  is dependent on the nominal system designation and BOP
      configuration as illustrated in the table below.

         Nominal System       BOP Stack        Housing Working     Minimum Vertical
            Designation           Configuration           Pressure              Bore
            9inches-psi)                                              (psi)                  (inches)
           18-3/4 – 10M              Single               10,000                17.56


                                   Page 9 of 21                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 294 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                     DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

           18-3/4 – 15M              Single               15,000                17.56
            16-3/4 – 5M              Single                5,000                15.12
           16-3/4 – 10M              Single               10,000                15.12
         20-3/4-21-1/4 – 2M           Dual                 2,000                18.59
           13-5/8 – 10M                                 10,000                12.31
            21-1/4 – 5M              Dual                 5,000                18.59
           13-5/8 – 15M                                 15,000                12.31
           18-3/4 – 10M             Dual                10,000                17.56
           13-5/8 – 15M                                 15,000                12.31

5.8  Casing Hanger
     The subsea hanger is installed on top of each casing string and supports the string in the
      wellhead housing.  It is normally run through the riser and BOP and then landed off in the
      wellhead. It has provision for a pack off assembly and should be able to support loads generated
     by BOP  test pressures above the hanger and subsequent casing  strings. A lock down
     mechanism can be used to restrict movement due to thermal expansion or annulus pressure. An
      external flow by area allows returns to flow past the hanger during cementing operations and is
      designed to minimise pressure drop should cuttings be returned. The hanger is usually supplied
      with a pup joint above to reduce the risk of damage during handling. The working assembly
      comprising casing hanger, pack off, running tool and cement plug launcher is normally pre-
      prepared and racked in the derrick prior to running casing.

      Casings hangers are categorised as either intermediate or production casing hangers and are
      treated as pressure controlling equipment. Design loads to be considered include suspended
      weight, overpull, internal and external pressure and thermal, torsion, radial and impact loads.
     The profile and design of a casing hanger is determined by the load and pressure ratings. These
       in turn are a function of the material used and wall section of the hanger as well as the
     equipment in which the hanger is seated. The following requirements need to be examined in
      casing hanger design and it is rated according to these requirements:
      •     Hanging capacity – The hanging capacity of casing from the hanger. A box thread is
             usually used for the casing/hanger connection
      •     Pressure capacity – The rating of the thread capacity at the bottom of the hanger may
                limit the pressure capacity of the hanger.
      •   BOP test pressure – This is the maximum pressure that can be applied to the upper
             portion of the hanger body and casing hanger pack off assembly
      •     Support capacity – This is the rated weight that the casing hanger(s) are capable of
             transferring to the wellhead housing or previous hanger(s) plus the internal pressures
      •     Flow by area – This is the minimum cumulative cross sectional area between a landed
           hanger and the wellhead housing bore. This is important during cementing operations
          when mud and cement returns flow through the cavity. The maximum particle diameter
           which can pass through this circulation path is also important.

5.9  Casing Hanger Pack-off Assemblies
     The casing hanger pack-off provides pressure isolation between the casing hanger and the
      wellhead via a metal to metal seal. It can be run with the casing hanger or separately and can be
      actuated by torque, weight and/or hydraulic pressure. Generally, for a certain wellhead size, the
      pack-off assemblies for use after each successive casing string are identical. Should a pack-off
     assembly fail to seal and it cannot be removed/replaced, a contingency emergency pack-off can
     be run. This uses sealing surfaces adjacent to the standard pack-off seal area within the
      wellhead housing and depends on elastomer seals.

     The subsea casing hanger pack-off must be treated as a pressure controlling equipment and the
      rated working pressure must be equal to that of the hanger. Design loads to be considered
      include setting loads, thermal loads, pressure loads and releasing/retrieval loads.

5.10 Bore Protectors and Wear Bushings
    A bore protector protects the casing hanger pack-off sealing surfaces inside the wellhead
      housing before the casing hangers are installed. After the casing hanger is run, a corresponding

                                   Page 10 of 21                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 295 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                     DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      size wear bushing is installed to protect the remaining annular sealing surface and the previously
       installed casing hanger pack-off assemblies and casing hangers. They are not considered to be
      pressure retaining devices although wear bushings may be designed to accommodate BOP
      pressure test loading.

      Design loads for bore protectors and wear bushings must include BOP test pressure loads and
       radial loads. BOP test loads can impose considerable compressive axial loads on wear bushings
      especially via tapered shoulders. The pack-off should also have some means of retaining  it in
      the locked down position.

5.11 Corrosion Cap
     The corrosion cap serves to protect the subsea wellhead from contamination by debris, marine
      growth or corrosion. These are normally non-pressure retaining and lock onto the external profile
       of the wellhead or conductor housing. If a pressure retaining cap is used, a means of sensing
     and relieving trapped pressure prior to releasing the cap must be provided. There is usually a
     means of injecting corrosion inhibitor beneath the cap to provide long term protection of the
      wellhead sealing surfaces since the cap  is normally installed for temporary abandonment
      purposes.

     There are no  critical design  issues  with  the  corrosion  cap.   It must  fulfil  its  functional
      requirements.

5.12 Running, Retrieving and Testing Tools
     These tools are used to assist with various subsea tasks such as running, retrieving and testing
      purposes, guidance, casing and housing suspension, annulus sealing and providing protection.
     Example selection of tools would include:
      •      Temporary guide base running tool (simple “J” tool)
      •       30” housing running tool (cam actuated, right hand rotation to release)
      •       18-3/4” wellhead housing running tool (cam actuated)
      •      Casing hanger running tool/ pack off installation tool (single trip run hanger, set pack-off)
      •     Wear bushing running/ retrieving tool
      •    BOP test tool
      •      Emergency pack-off recovery and installation tool

     The running tools are torqued to the  drill pipe running string.  If being run in open water as
     opposed to the riser, more robust connections are required (6-5/8” reg); those to be run in the
       riser can utilise 4-1/2” I.F. connections.

      Design loads should include suspended weight, bending loads, pressure, torsion loads, radial,
       overpull and environmental loads.  The tools should have adequate necks for the tongues to
       grip, and also;
      •           It is possible that the load capacity of the tool string may be less than its running string
             connection strength.
      •      Though bores should be adequate for circulation and the passage of tools  such as
            cement darts.
      •      Flow area past the tools should be sufficient to minimise any swab/surge while tripping
            and should permit the tools to drain while pulling out.
      •        Air vent ports need to be included in the open water 30” and 18-3/4” housing running
               tools to allow air to be expelled when the casing is run into the sea.

6   Tubing Suspension Equipment

6.1  Tubing Hanger
     The dual bore tubing hanger is used to suspend and seal the tubing into the wellhead such that
     a Xmas tree can be installed later. The tubing hanger must also be able to communicate the
      production and annulus bores and the various hydraulic and electrical downhole functions. To do
      so, it must be correctly orientated within the wellhead to ensure that the connections mate with
      those in the tree.

                                   Page 11 of 21                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 296 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                     DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


     The hanger is concentric but  it is oriented by a helix within the tree spool to ensure that all the
      connections line up with those in the tree correctly. Integrity monitoring of the electrical and
      hydraulic lines is conducted while running in to detect any damage before the hanger is landed.
     The primary component is the main body. This contains both production and annulus bores,
      bores for safety valve control lines and for downhole electrical functions. Two sealing options are
      used. Either a nose seal can be fitted to the bottom end of the tubing hanger to seal on the
      production casing or a pack-off can be provided to seal between the hanger and the wellhead.

     The horizontal tree hanger does not seat in the wellhead. The tree is installed and then the
      tubing hanger is set in the tree body. The advantages of this option are that the completion and
      hanger can be pulled later without disturbing the tree and flow-line and larger tubing sizes can be
     accommodated.
      Here, the primary component is also the main body of the hanger which contains a main through
      bore and side outlet. A wireline plug profile is incorporated into the vertical bore above the side
       outlet for a metal-metal sealing wireline plug. It also carries upper and lower pack-off seals and
     an orientation sleeve attached to its lower end. There will also be seal mechanisms for safety
      valve control lines and electrical connections for pressure/temperature gauges.

      Mechanical interface problems can arise  if the wellhead and tubing hanger are supplied by
       different companies. In this case,  it is essential that detailed information on the wellhead are
      given to the completion equipment supplier. Other interfaces to beware are wireline plug profiles
       in the production and annulus bores, the production and annulus box threads and the electrical
      penetrator.

      Design issues centre around the production casing and tubing size. For a dual bore hanger, the
      production tubing offset must be such that the tubing will still fit in the production casing. The
      coupling diameters must also be considered.  The pressure rating of the pack-off seal and
      tubing hanger landing shoulder should exceed that of the production and annulus bores. They
      should also be able to contain any pressure leaks should the SCSSSV control line leak into the
      tree/wellhead cavity during production. API 17D provides guidance on pressure ratings for this
       eventuality.  Third party wireline plug details should also be carefully considered during hanger
      design.

6.2  Tubing Hanger Running and Orientation Tool (THROT)
     The THROT is used to run, orientate and lock the tubing hanger and completion string into the
      wellhead through the drilling riser and BOP. It is normally run on the same workover riser joints
     as used to run the tree. Downhole electrical and hydraulic functions are routed through the
    THROT to connect into an umbilical thus allowing continuous monitoring while running/setting
      the hanger. Recent developments include use of a subsea test tree within the THROT and the
     use of a monobore riser.
     The THROT  for a horizontal tree tubing hanger  is simpler because  it does not have an
       orientation helix and can be run on a dedicated monobore riser or completion tubing.

     The lower end of the THROT interfaces with the latch profile on the tubing hanger. Its upper end
       interfaces with a standard workover riser joint and a small umbilical. A helix on the THROT
     engages with a hydraulic pin on the BOP to orientate the tubing hanger in relation to the
      wellhead. However, prior to this, the THROT must first be aligned at surface. The horizontal tree
    THROT requires no alignment prior to being run.

      Regarding THROT design issues, it is important to know which RAMS or annulars will be used
       to provide a seal when pressure testing the pack-off seal. If the rig is unknown, then sufficient
      range should be provided on the sealing spool to accommodate most eventualities. Similarly,
     any spare choke and kill side outlets must be determined in order to position the helix.
     The tensile capacity of the THROT should be able to support the expected string weight. The
    THROT external dimensions need to be considered regarding any possible restrictions e.g. BOP
       flex joint. Similarly, the internal dimensions of the THROT should be compared with any wireline
       tools likely to be run.
     The parts of the THROT should be properly keyed to ensure rotational rigidity between the key
      mating with the tubing hanger and the slot in the orientation sleeve.


                                   Page 12 of 21                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 297 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                     DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

6.3  Horizontal Tree Landing String
      Often referred to as the completion/work-over riser (C/WO riser) is a dedicated modularised
       tubular member connecting the subsea equipment to surface. There are two types – Dual-Bore
     and Mono-Bore. The latter is normally used in conjunction with a horizontal Xmas tree, otherwise
     known as a spool tree or side valve tree. A key safety feature of the landing string is the ability to
      unlatch from the tubing hanger yet still provide the two barrier statutory requirement between the
      production tubing and the surrounding environment. A subsea completion test tree is often
      incorporated above the tubing hanger running tool for this requirement. The test tree typically
      comprises ball valves in both the production and annulus bores and a connector referred to as
      the emergency release latch. The time allowed for the complete disconnection of the landing
       string depends on whether  it is deployed from an anchored vessel or a dynamically positioned
      (DP) vessel. The latter case must be able to release quickly to accommodate a drive-off from
       location due to bad weather or thruster failure.

     Functions
     The principal function of the landing string is to run the completion tubing into the hole through
      the BOP and riser.
     The tubing hanger is landed off within the tree and locked in place using the THROT. In this
     mode, the riser is run in conjunction with the intervention equipment (subsea test tree, retainer
       valve, lubricator valve) to provide a tubular conduit through which the initial well test can be
       carried out. This system is primarily used on fixed or anchored installations. With a DP vessel,
      there is the need for a subsea control module (SCM) to increase the response times of the
      conventional direct hydraulically controlled version.
     Once the well test is complete, the tubing hanger bore protector can be pulled on wireline
      through the completion/ work-over riser and a plug set into the mating profile in the tubing
      hanger. The dedicated hydraulic umbilical providing control functions to the THROT is clamped
       to the riser.

     The landing string can also be used for intervention work on a subsea horizontal tree.  It is
      possible to re-install the BOP and marine riser and then re-establish the landing string latched
     on to the tubing hanger. However, in many cases, it would be considered a more cost-effective
       solution to run the completion/work-over riser in open water in conjunction with an emergency
      disconnect package (EDP) and a lower riser package (LRP). This would require only one trip. In
       this mode, the C/WO riser would provide a pressure conduit through which wireline plugs could
     be pulled and set, coil tubing techniques employed and the well could be produced to surface. A
       larger dedicated hydraulic umbilical would also be required to provide the necessary control
      functions for the EDP, LRP and Xmas tree.

     Design
      For a specific riser pressure rating and bore size, consideration should be given to the structural
       strength, fatigue life and operating limitations. These are governed by vessel type, water depth,
     sea states, current velocities and directions, vessel characteristics and vessel off-set. The tubing
     hanger mode is the less onerous scenario since the riser is protected by the marine riser in this
      instance.

      Principal Operations and Interfaces
     The bore through the riser normally matches the nominal bore through the subsea horizontal
       tree and must allow passage of wireline plugs and bore protector from within the tubing hanger.
     Each riser joint is made up of a production tubular with welded box and pin connectors on the
      ends. All the axial and bending loads are taken by the production tubular as is the pressure end
       load. A standard riser joint is 45 feet and the string is supported by a riser spider at the rotary
       table during running/retrieval operations. The spider is hydraulically operated and closes on a
      landing shoulder provided just below the box connector of each joint. A separate shoulder on the
      underside of the box connector can be supported by a standard set of elevators and allows the
       riser string to be raised or lowered through the spider. The overall length of the riser can be
      adjusted using pup joints to allow the surface equipment to be conveniently positioned relative to
      the rig floor.





                                   Page 13 of 21                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 298 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                 DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

Riser Spider
This supports the landing string with tubing attached at the rotary table. It also centralises the
string while being run/retrieved through the rotary table bushings which also helps to prevent any
damage occurring to the umbilical normally clamped to the riser.

Surface Joint
Referred to as the landing joint or cased wear joint, this is required in both modes and is situated
directly below the surface tree. It is essentially a standard length joint with a 16” shroud running
almost the entire length. Once the LRP or tubing hanger is landed, the surface joint slides up
and down through the rotary to accommodate rig or riser movements, normally 15ft plus or
minus from the nominal position. The shroud centralises the riser and provides protection for the
umbilical which is contained within a slot running the length of the shroud.

Stress Joint
This provides the interface between the EDP and the standard riser when in “Xmas tree” mode.
This joint is normally tapered, thickest at  its lower end, and able to provide extra bending
capacity at the base of the riser.

Tension Joint
This is a derivative of the standard joint and is positioned directly below the surface joint where it
provides a method of applying additional tension to the riser within the moon-pool area using the
marine riser tensioning system. It has a tension ring situated halfway along its length equipped
with four pad-eyes for attaching the lines. Thus the riser load is shared between the derrick and
the marine riser tensioning system which offers a greater operating envelope.

Lubricator Valve
This valve  is positioned just below the slash zone and  its function  is to provide pressure
containment of the landing string production bore when wireline or coil tubing activities are being
deployed through the surface tree swab valve.  It comprises a ball valve capable of shearing
either wireline or coil.

Standard Joints and Pipe Utility Piece (PUP) Joints
The standard joint is forty five feet long and comprises a main tubular which provides pressure
integrity and tensile capacity within a given depth of water. The end connections must enable the
passage of the control umbilical. The joints are run pin up. Double shoulders are provided at the
upper end of each joint, one to locate a single joint elevator and one to allow landing in the
spider. The seal faces may require exotic alloy inlays to prevent corrosion from acid gases
(carbon dioxide and hydrogen sulphide).

Subsea Accumulator Module (SAM) and Control Module (SCM)
When a C/WO riser is being run in water depths greater than 500 metres, the SCM and SAM
are usually incorporated. They enable an emergency disconnect from either the tree or locked-
down tubing hanger in less than sixty seconds. This is effected using electrical signals from a
surface control module fed via an armoured umbilical to the SCM. Here, a solenoid valve on the
SAM is opened allowing hydraulic pressure to function the necessary valves. The distance from
the hydraulic accumulators to the valves is about 90 feet which promotes a far more rapid
response than  if hydraulic pressure had to be communicated from the surface down to the
valves.

Retainer Valve
The retainer valve is located at the lower end of the C/WO riser and its primary function is to
contain fluid within the riser during an emergency disconnect. Hence, it is used in tubing hanger
mode only. It should also be able to bleed off any trapped pressure between the upper valve of
the subsea test tree and retained ball valve.

It comprises a ball valve which is able to retain the internal pressure of the production riser, seal
off against hydrostatic pressure which might be in the region of 5,000psi at 2,500 metres and
should be able to shear wireline and coil tubing. It should also provide a conduit for hydraulic and
electrical control lines to both the subsea test tree and tubing hanger running tool.  It also
provides a smooth outer diameter for the elastomeric seal of the BOP annular to close around. It
should be rated to the same bore and pressure as the tubing hanger within the subsea


                             Page 14 of 21                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 299 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                     DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

       horizontal tree. The lower connection of the retainer is attached to a shear sub which will enable
      the BOP to shear through the production tubular and retain well pressure should the latch fail at
      the top of the test tree. Thus, on several counts, the elevation of this section of the pipe is
        critical.

     Subsea test tree
     The subsea test tree is the last piece of equipment between the C/WO riser and the tubing
      hanger running tool and is only used in the tubing hanger mode within the marine riser. Its
      primary function is to provide the statutory two barriers between the production fluid and marine
      environment in the event of an emergency disconnect. It comprises an upper connector to the
      shear sub (referred to as a latch that can be hydraulically actuated) and two ball valves, the
      lower to shear coil/ wireline and seal and the upper to provide a second seal. These must be
      sized and pressure rated to suit the tubing hanger. The valve closure sequence is normally lower
       valve, upper valve, retainer valve and then latch release.

6.4  Emergency Recovery Tools
     These tools are primarily used to recover the tubing hanger in the event of failure of the THROT.
     They are normally purely mechanical devices with simple operating mechanisms.

     The emergency pack-off recovery tool is run on drill pipe to recover the tubing hanger pack-off
      thus releasing the tubing hanger lock down ring.  It engages the threads on the inside of the
      pack-off allowing this to be retrieved with a straight pull. The tubing hanger emergency recovery
       tool is run and landed-off inside the tubing hanger. Rotation to the left forces the lock ring out
     and this allows the tubing hanger to be recovered with a straight over-pull.

      Design capacities should be clearly stated and include a significant safety margin since it is likely
       that these tools will experience heavy usage through jarring and over-pulls.
     These tools should be able to engage with the tubing hanger under any circumstances e.g. with
       wireline plugs installed.

6.5  Tubing Hanger Handling and Test Tool
      This enables the tubing hanger to be handled safely and pressure tested. For a dual bore tubing
      hanger, the test tool comprises both a production stinger and an annulus stinger each equipped
      with elastomer seals.

     The tool should be able to interface with the tubing hanger and seal at the required pressure. It
      should also be able to lock with the tubing hanger using the latch profile on the tubing hanger.

     Space Out Measurement Tool/ Lead Impression Tool
     These tools help to determine the height of the production casing hanger relative to the
     lockdown  profile  in the bore of the wellhead. The lead impression tool provides a basic
     measurement while the space out tool gives a more accurate figure.

     These tools are run on  drill pipe and activated by closing the rams or annular and then
      pressuring up on top of the tool.

     There are no design issues with these tools. The space out tool may require calibrating due to its
      greater degree of accuracy.

6.6 BOP Orientation Pin
     The purpose of the orientation pin is to engage with the (THROT) helix and orientate the dual
      bore tubing hanger within the wellhead. It is mounted to a spare choke or kill line side outlet on
      the BOP stack and can be hydraulically extended into the BOP bore at the appropriate time. No
      pin is required with a horizontal tree.

     The pin is simply a spring retract hydraulic piston and must be rated to the operating pressure of
      the BOP since it could be exposed to wellbore fluids.



                                   Page 15 of 21                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 300 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                     DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      Design issues should consider the consequences of a stem packing leakage when the stack is
     exposed to test or wellbore pressure. There may be a requirement for ROV override of the pin in
      the event of hydraulic or spring failure.

     The main concern with the hydraulic orientation pin  is that,  if  it  fails to retract,  it may be
      impossible to pull the THROT or any other down-hole tool through the BOP to the surface. This
      could have serious consequences for well control.

7   Subsea Xmas Tree System

7.1  Control Systems
     The control system on a subsea well allows enables surface control of the tree valves, downhole
      safety valves, chokes, chemical control and metering valves. The system can also be used to
      monitor process variables such as pressure, temperature, flow rate and valve and choke
       position. There are five basic methods of implementing control:

       1. Direct hydraulic
    A dedicated hydraulic hose for each subsea function runs from the control panel via an umbilical
       to the valve actuator. The control panel valve when opened allows hydraulic fluid from a supply
      header to flow into the actuator. As the pressure on the actuator piston increases, the spring
     compresses and the valve opens. Closing the control panel valve allows the pressure to bleed
        off which in turn allows the subsea valve to close.

      Topside requirements      - Hydraulic power unit
                                           - Manual control valves
     Subsea equipment          - Umbilical
                                           - Umbilical termination unit

     Advantages                   - low cost, reliable, easy access for maintenance
      Disadvantages               - Slow response time over greater distances, busy umbilical, absence
                                   of any subsea monitoring facilities.

       2. Piloted hydraulic
       Similar to the Direct Hydraulic control with the addition of a subsea control module to improve
      response time. The subsea control module contains a number of pilot valves (one per function)
     and a subsidiary hydraulic reservoir charged by the surface supply header.

     To open the subsea valve, the surface valve is operated. This communicates hydraulic pressure
       to the subsea control panel mounted pilot valve which opens allowing the hydraulic fluid from the
      subsidiary subsea hydraulic cylinder to flow into the valve actuator and thus open the valve. The
      valve is closed by moving the surface control panel mounted valve to the vent position; this
      bleeds off the hydraulic pressure throughout the line.

      Topside requirements      - Hydraulic power unit
                                           - Manual control valves
     Subsea equipment          - Umbilical
                                           - Umbilical termination unit
                                           - Hydraulic jumper hose
                                           - Subsea control module

     Advantages                   - Simplistic design
                                           - Low cost, high reliability
                                           - Easy access to critical components
                                           - Quicker response time due to the reduced volume needed to pump
      Disadvantages               - Response time still slow with long umbilicals
                                           - The umbilical comprises many hydraulic hoses, two per function
                                           - There is no subsea measurement/ monitoring system

       3. Sequenced hydraulic



                                   Page 16 of 21                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 301 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                     DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

     To simplify the previous configuration, it is possible for multiple pilot valves to be controlled by a
       single surface pressure regulator. In this instance, the different pilot valves are actuated at
       different pressures.

      Topside requirements      - Hydraulic power unit
                                           - Manual control valves
     Subsea equipment          - Umbilical
                                           - Umbilical termination unit
                                           - Hydraulic jumper hose
                                           - Subsea control module

     Advantages                   - Low cost, high reliability
                                           - Easy access to critical components
                                           - Reduced number of hoses in umbilical
      Disadvantages               - Response time still slow with long umbilicals
                                           - The sequence of valve operation is fixed unless subsea intervention
                                           - There is no subsea measurement/ monitoring system

       4. Electro-hydraulic
     The pilot valves are fitted with solenoids to enable them to be electrically operated from the
      surface. To open a subsea valve, the appropriate surface switch is closed which energises the
      solenoid valve and opens the  pilot valve. Hydraulic  fluid can then flow from the subsea
      accumulator into the valve actuator. The valve is closed by de-energising the solenoid (power
        off) which allows hydraulic fluid from the subsea valve to drain back into the accumulator.

      Topside requirements      - Hydraulic power unit
                                           - Manual switches
                                           - Electrical power unit
     Subsea equipment          - Umbilical
                                           - Umbilical termination unit
                                           - Hydraulic jumper hose
                                           - Subsea control module

     Advantages                   - Can operate over greater distances with reasonable response time
                                           - Use of electrics allows valve position feed-back
                                           - Reduced number of hoses in umbilical
      Disadvantages               - Reliability more critical due to use of subsea electrics
                                           - Higher cost – electrical controls and more complex valves/umbilical

       5. Multiplexed electro-hydraulic
      This system revolves around the subsea electronics module (SEM) situated in the subsea
       control module (SCM) and the master control station (MCS) at surface.
     Subsea control module (SCM)
      This contains a microprocessor which monitors and stores inputs (temps, pressure) and acts on
      requests from the MCS for data or valve commands.

7.2  Master control station (MCS)
      This  is essentially a computer equipped with a modem to communicate with the SCM.  It
      provides the following functions:
       1.  Communicates with the SCM
       2.  Provides an operator interface with the system
       3.  Displays process equipment
       4.  Means of controlling subsea equipment
       5.  Performs automatic functions e.g. emergency shut-downs
       6.  Historical data storage

      Topside requirements      - Hydraulic power unit (HPU)
                                           - Master control station (MCS)
                                           - Electrical power unit (EPU)
     Subsea equipment          - Umbilical
                                           - Umbilical termination unit

                                   Page 17 of 21                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 302 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                     DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

                                           - Hydraulic jumper hose
                                           - Subsea control module (SCM)

     Advantages                   - Can operate over greater distances with good response time
                                           - Use of microprocessor allows measurement of variables
                                           - Few Hydraulic hoses plus electrical wiring in umbilical
                                           - A single communication line operates many valves
      Disadvantages               - Reliability more critical due to use of subsea electronics
                                           - Higher cost – electronics, computer and software

7.3  Larger systems
     The above describes a single tree configuration. For a subsea development using multiple trees,
           it is normal to control multiple wells, each with its own SCM with unique address, from the same
      surface MCS. A subsea distribution unit (SDU) delivers the individual hydraulic and electrical
      connecting lines from the umbilical to each SCM.

     Valves
     There are several types of valves in use – needle valves for sealing for sealing off hydraulic
       control fluid and gate valves for sealing off well fluids.

     The following features support gate valve use for sealing well fluids:
       1.  Bi-directional (seals against flow in both directions)
       2.  Full bore access
       3.  Metal sealing between gate and seat, seat and body and body and bonnet.
       4.  Sealing between stem and body either elastomeric or thermoplastic
       5.  Pressure locking of gate to seat will not occur for single slab gate

     Needle valves are normally manually operated by either diver or ROV intervention. Gate valves
     however can either be manually or hydraulically operated. Although essentially similar internally,
     manual and hydraulic gate valves differ only in the stem and stem/bonnet seals. A hydraulic
      actuated valve relies on the actuator to provide a linear force to open/close the valve. A manual
      valve requires a diver/ROV to rotate the valve stem to open/close the gate. A non-rising valve
     stem is preferable since the sealing part of the stem is protected and not exposed to seawater.

    A subsea xmas tree normally carries the following gate valves:

     Production master valve (PMV)
      This is normally open during production. Used to shut in the well during an emergency or when
      the tree cap is removed. Hydraulically operated for more rapid response, the valve operates in a
         fail safe close mode. Some Operators may elect to have a second manually operated Master
      Valve below the PMV as a back-up.

     Production swab valve (PSV)
     Used only on conventional trees. Isolates well flow to the tree cap during production (valve
      closed) and allows vertical access during work-over operations (valve open). The PSV can only
     be opened during work-over operations and can either be hydraulically operated via the work-
      over control system (fail safe close) or manually operated by ROV.

     Production wing valve (PWV)
     Used to control the flow of well fluids. Normally hydraulically operated (fail safe close).

     Annulus master valve (AMV)
      Normally closed during production operations. Will be open if gas lift is required. Used to isolate
      the annulus  if well fluids are discovered in the annulus due to packer or tubing failure. Acts as
      back-up to the annulus wing valve.

     Annulus swab valve (ASV)
      Function and operation as for production swab valve.

     Annulus wing valve (AWV)


                                   Page 18 of 21                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 303 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                     DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      Normally closed during production. If gas lift required, it is used to control the fluid flow from the
     gas lift line into the annulus. Hydraulically operated (fail safe close).

     Cross-over valve
      Normally closed during production. Enables communication between the production and annulus
      bores during work-over riser/flowline flushing or pressure testing.

     Chemical injection valve (CIV)
      Normally situated between the production master and production wing valves. Isolates the
      chemical injection line from the surface. The valve is normally between 0.5” and 0.75” in size
     and is normally hydraulically operated (fail safe close) for rapid response.

       In addition to the above, there are usually manual needle valves (ROV operated) for isolating the
      Tree Connector test line and Down Hole Safety Valve (DHSV) hydraulic control line.

7.4  Actuators

     Most of the valves on a subsea tree need to be remotely operated and this is accomplished
      using actuators. These are normally hydraulically driven because:
       1.  Power source (hydraulic pump) is readily available
       2.  Reliable
       3.  Fast response time
       4.  Hydraulic pumps can generate high pressure thus enabling a compact design

      Actuators are designed as “fail safe closed” for subsea tree applications to ensure that, in the
      event of loss of hydraulic pressure, the well will be shut-in. A back-up facility in the form of a
      diver/ROV override is also normally provided and incorporated in the ROV panel usually located
       at the edge of the tree frame for ease of access.

     The valve size is usually dictated by the size of the bore required. The size of the valve stem
      should be sufficient such that the force generated by the line pressure on the sealing diameter of
      the stem will close the valve if hydraulic pressure is lost. For shallow water application, 3000psi
        is the most common design operating pressure. For deep water or big valves (5"”plus), an
      operating pressure of 5000-10000psi may be used to keep the size of the actuator to a
     minimum. According to API 17D requirements, the actuator should be able to operate under the
     most demanding conditions likely without exceeding 90% of the design operating pressure.
        All subsea actuators require some form of compensation system to counter balance the static
     head of the hydraulic operating pressure from surface. This is achieved through the use of a
      bladder type hydraulic accumulator on the back side (spring side) of the actuator piston. To
     comply with API 17D, the back pressure must remain at a minimum of 100psi with zero psi line
      pressure at the maximum rated operating depth.

     Water based hydraulic fluid is the most common type. Use of more exotic fluids will need to
      consider elastomer compatibility and any density difference over sea water in connection with
      piston sizing especially in deep water applications.

8    Diving Methods Vs ROV Use

     The development of subsea experience and technology has enabled a wider range of diving
       activities to take place at increasingly greater depths.  In air diving surface decompression
      procedures are widely used to maximise bottom time. However depth is the limiting factor in air
       diving as the partial pressure oxygen rises with the depth increase and becomes toxic within the
      blood stream and will cause the diver to lose consciousness.  Therefore the divers tasks are
       limited to maximum depth of approximately 55ft.  Consequently tasks that are carried out at
      greater depths require saturation diving and mixed gases such as Trimix and Heliox.  This is
     now a common and commercial method of carrying out subsea operations at extended depths.

     The current depth limit set in the UK is 650ft. However the maximum depth that a commercial
       diver can operate at is calculated on an economically viable basis rather than the effects on
       his/hers physiology.  With increased depths there comes increased safety risk and the divers


                                   Page 19 of 21                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 304 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                 DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

ability to carry out his tasks, moreover the decompression issues surrounded in extended depth
make operation physically and economically unjustifiable.  Therefore the industry driver is to
make diving operations safer, less risky and commercially viable.





                             Page 20 of 21                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 305 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                 DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


The advantages and disadvantages of the various methods are summarised in the table below:

 Intervention Method     Advantages                   Disadvantages

 ROV                   Depth(1000m)                  Lack of sensory feedback
                         Cost                          Lack of spatial awareness
                        Less downtime – mechanical,    Tooling expensive
                         weather                           Affected by swell
                          Adaptable                   Cameras remote from site
                     Good future                    Cannot interrogate
                           Safer                                Totally reliant on video

 Manned Submersible     Depth (1000m)                    Battery life
                   On site observer                Lack of access
                           Diver for specific operations       Unsuitable for mid-water work
                           Suited to one off applications      Deployment costly
                         Operate in currents               Manipulators restricted

 Atmospheric    Diving   No decompression                Unsuitable for inspection
 Suits                   Depth (700m)                         Pilot fatigue
                   Some dexterity                 Lack of access
                           Suited for one off applications      Totally dependent on visibility
                                                              Limited sensory feedback

 Diving                      Spatial awareness              Depth constraint (300m)
                         Dextrous                  Human risk
                             Interrogate                     Expensive
                          Adaptable                   Sea state restrictions
                            Trainable                          Umbilical drag
                                                      Performance variances





                             Page 21 of 21                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 306 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

                  SECTION 15
            COMPLETION EQUIPMENT


     Contents
1.0    Introduction                                                                  3
2.0   Completion Types / Classification                                                 3
  2.1    Interface Between Wellbore and Reservoir                                        4
     2.1.1   Open Hole Completions                                                   4
     2.1.2   Cased and Uncemented                                                   4
     2.1.3   Cemented and Perforated Completions                                       5
  2.2   Production Method                                                          5
     2.2.1   Flow Naturally                                                           5
     2.2.2     Artificial Lift                                                             6
3.0   Completion Equipment                                                         6
  3.1   Christmas Tree                                                             6
     3.1.1    Surface Trees                                                           7
     3.1.2   Subsea Trees                                                           7
     3.1.3   Tree Choice                                                            7
  3.2   Well Head                                                                 8
     3.2.1    Tubing Hanger                                                          8
  3.3   Sub Surface Safety Valve (SSSV)                                              9
     3.3.1    Definitions                                                              9
     3.3.2    Closure Mechanisms                                                     9
     3.3.3    Certification                                                            10
     3.3.4   Types Of SCSSV                                                       10
     3.3.5    Annular Safety System (ASV)                                              12
     3.3.6    Non-Equalising or Self-Equalising.                                          13
     3.3.7    Single Control Line or Dual Balanced Lines.                                  13
  3.4    Blast Joints, Flow Couplings and Pup Joints                                      13
     3.4.1   Flow Couplings                                                         13
     3.4.2    Blast Joints                                                            13
     3.4.3   Pup Joints                                                             14
  3.5   Landing Nipples                                                            14
     3.5.1    Wireline Locks                                                         15
     3.5.2    Controlled ID Joint                                                      15
  3.6    Sliding Sleeve                                                             15
  3.7   Mandrels                                                                 16
     3.7.1    Side Pocket Mandrels (SPMs)                                             16
     3.7.2   Gauge Mandrel                                                         16
     3.7.3   Chemical Injection Mandrel                                               17
  3.8   Expansion Devices and Anchoring Methods                                      17
     3.8.1    Polished Bore Receptacle (PBR)                                           17
     3.8.2   Expansion Joint Seal Assembly                                            18
     3.8.3   Anchor Seal Nipple                                                      18
     3.8.4   Shear Release Anchor                                                   18
     3.8.5    Hydraulic Release Anchor                                                19
  3.9   Production Packer                                                          19
     3.9.1   Packer Components                                                     19
     3.9.2   Permanent Verses Retrievable                                             20
     3.9.3   Permanent Packer                                                      20
     3.9.4    Retrievable Packer                                                      20
     3.9.5    Retrieving and Milling                                                    21
     3.9.6    Mechanical Set Packer                                                   22
     3.9.7    Hydraulic Set Packer                                                    22
     3.9.8   Dual Bore Packer                                                       22
     3.9.9     Mill Out Extension (MOE)                                                 22
    3.9.10  Seal Bore Extension (SBE)                                                22
  3.10  Remote Actuated Tools                                                      23
    3.10.1  Schlumberger Liner Top Isolation Device (LTIV)                               23


                                   Page 1 of 25                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 307 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

    3.10.2  Ocre Tools                                                            23
    3.10.3   Hydrostatic Tools                                                       23
    3.10.4  Baker Oil Tools Edge System                                              24
    3.10.5   Halliburton Mirage Disappearing Plug                                       24
    3.10.6  PES Anvil Plug                                                         24
  3.11  Tailpipe                                                                   24
    3.11.1   Perforated Joint                                                        24
    3.11.2   Wireline Entry guide                                                     24
4.0    Typical Completion Program                                                    25
5.0    Typical Workover Program                                                     25





                                   Page 2 of 25                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 308 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

1.0  Introduction

      Completion design is the process of converting a drilled wellbore into a safe and efficient
      production or injection system.

       Prior to starting any design the following information is required

      •   Reservoir parameters
        −   Porosity, permeability, homogenity, thickness, angle, water / gas / oil pressure profiles
      •  Rock characteristics
        −  Rock strength, formation damage potential
      •   Production constraints
        −   Fluids handling, injection pressures
      •   Fluid characteristics
        −   Density, composition, GOR, toxicity, pour point, scaling tendency, wax, asphaltene,
           CO2, contaminates
      •   Well appraisal data
        −   Rates, pressure, temperatures, samples
      •   Facilities information
        −   Control line pump pressures, flowline sizes, sampling  / testing  / monitoring, safety
               constraints
      •    Drilling data
        −   Well profile, casing program (and constraints), safety valve depth constraints
      •   Field economics
        −  Time frame and importance of fluids, life of field, trade off between CAPEX and OPEX,
               tax implications

    Some of the above information might not be readily available or can be reached by discussion
      with other members of the project team.  Eg  if a specific tubing size is required to meet a
      flowrate then  it needs to  fit inside the production casing, so need discussion with  drilling
      engineer.

     The information is used to determine what type of completion is run, the tubing size, material
       specification and the additional completion equipment used.

      Tubing design (similar to casing design) is undertaken. The design needs to accommodate
      collapse, burst, and tensile load cases for the complete life of well.

      Generally speaking the simpler the completion the greater it’s reliability.

2.0  Completion Types / Classification

     There are a number of ways of classifying completions. However the main types are as shown
     below

        Interface between wellbore and reservoir       −  Open hole

                                              −  Cased and Uncemented
                                              −  Cased and cemented
       Production method                         −  Flow naturally
                                              −   Require artificial lift
      Stage of completion                        −    Initial
                                              −  Recompletion
                                              −  Workover




                                   Page 3 of 25                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 309 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

2.1  Interface Between Wellbore and Reservoir

2.1.1 Open Hole Completions
       In an openhole or barefoot completion, the production casing is set in the caprock above or just
       into the top of the pay zone, while the bottom of the hole is left uncased. Often, the final drilling
       of the pay zone is carried out with special non-damaging drilling fluids or an underbalanced mud
      column. This form of well completion dates back to the days of cable tool drilling, but is rarely
     used today.

                  Advantages                         Disadvantages
      Exposure  of  entire  pay  zone  to  the   Inability  to  control  excessive   gas-oil
       wellbore                                  and/or water-oil ratios (except in the case
                                                        of bottom water)
     No perforating expense                Need  to  set  casing  before  drilling  or
                                                  logging the pay;
      Less   critical  need   for   precise   log   Difficulty  of  controlling  the  well  during
        interpretation                             completion operations
      Reduced drawdown because of the large   Unsuitability    for   producing   layered
        inflow area                                formations    consisting    of   separate
                                                     reservoirs    with    incompatible     fluid
                                                    properties
        Slightly reduced casing cost                    Inability to selectively stimulate separate
                                            zones within the completion interval
      Ease of deepening the well;             Need   for  frequent  clean-outs    if  the
                                                producing  sands  are  not  completely
                                             competent  or    if  the  shoulder  of  the
                                               caprock between the shoe and top of the
                                           pay is not stable
       Relative ease of converting the well to a
         liner completion
     No  risk  of  formation damage  resulting
       from cementing casing

2.1.2 Cased and Uncemented
     To overcome the problems of collapsing sands plugging the production system, the early oil
      producers placed slotted pipe or screens across the openhole section as a downhole sand filter.

     The simplest and oldest  liner completion method involves running  slotted pipe  into the
      openhole. The slots are cut small enough that the produced sand bridges off on the opening
       rather than passing through. This method is till used in some areas today, but because it entails
     many of the same disadvantages inherent in openhole completions (i.e., lack of control), its use
        is not widespread.

      For very fine sands, wire-wrapped screens or sintered bronze are used in place of machine-cut
       slots. This technique is a reasonably effective sand control method in uniform coarse sands with
          little or no fine particles (e.g., in California). Sometimes this is the only sand control system that
     can be used because of pressure loss and placement considerations (e.g., in unconsolidated
     heavy  oil  sands).  In  general, however,  the uncemented  liner  completion  is no  longer
     recommended because:
      •  sand movement into the wellbore tends to cause permeability impairment by the intermixing
           of sand sizes, and of sand and shale particles
      •   fine formation sands tend to plug the slots or the screen
      •   at high rates, the screen often erodes as formation sand moves into the wellbore
      •   poor support of the formation can cause shale layers to collapse and plug the slots or
         screen
      •   formation failure can cause the liner itself to collapse


                                   Page 4 of 25                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 310 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

     To overcome these problems, operators have resorted to more effective sand control methods
     such as gravel packing, in which the annulus between the screen and the openhole is filled with
      coarse, graded sand, or the use of pre-packed screens. In some cases, even where sand
       control is planned, it may be best to employ a cased and perforated completion with an external
      gravel pack--this configuration has become the norm  for  light  oil and gas developments
     because of the flexibility it provides.

2.1.3 Cemented and Perforated Completions
     By far the most common type of completion today involves cementing the production casing (or
        liner) through the pay zone, and subsequently providing communication with the formation by
       perforating holes through the casing and cement. Ideally, perforations should penetrate any
     damaged zone around the original wellbore and create a clean conduit within the undamaged
      formation.  If the well is cased and unperforated during the early stages of the completion
      operation, well control is easier and completion costs may be reduced.

      Using various depth control techniques, the required sections of pay are perforated and opened
       to flow, thereby avoiding undesired fluids (gas, water), weak zones that might produce sand,
     and unproductive sections or shale barriers.

      This selectivity, which is completely dependent on a good cement job and adequate perforating,
      also allows a single well-bore to produce several separate reservoirs without their being in
      communication. This is done by setting isolating packers within an unperforated section of the
       pipe. Selective perforation can also be used to control the flow from, or stimulation of, various
      parts of the pay. By shutting off or partially plugging selected perforations, injected fluids (water,
       stimulation fluids, or cement) can be diverted into less permeable zones.

     Cementing casing at TD rather than completing the well openhole can reduce the likelihood of
       well control problems. Moreover, the decision to set production casing can be deferred until the
      openhole logs of the prospective pay zone have been evaluated, substantially reducing the dry-
      hole costs if the hole is dry.

       In summary, the advantages of cased and perforated completions include

      •      safer operations
      •     more informed selection of the zones to be completed
      •     reduced sensitivity to drilling damage
      •        facilitation of selective stimulation
      •       possibility of multizone completions
      •      reduced dry-hole costs
      •      easier planning of completion operations

      This type of completion is generally used unless there is a specific reason to prefer an openhole
      or uncemented liner completion. Even where sand control is planned, perforated completions
      with internal gravel packs have become the norm for light oil and gas developments because of
      the flexibility provided.

2.2  Production Method

2.2.1 Flow Naturally
      Naturally flowing is when a reservoir can flow to surface, at an economic rate, due to the
       reservoir pressure without any external assistance.

2.2.1.1 Tubingless Completions
      Tubingless completions are a low cost completion type but rarely used as the production casing
        is exposed to reservoir pressure and corrosion. In addition additional safety devices cannot be
       installed.




                                   Page 5 of 25                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 311 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

2.2.1.2 Tubing Completions
     By far the most common method of completing a well is to run a single or multiple tubing strings
       into the well, depending upon the number of zones to be completed.

2.2.2 Artificial Lift
    When a well will not flow naturally to surface at an economic rate then artificial  lift techniques
     can be used to boost production. Common methods of artificial lift for offshore operations are

      •  Gas lift
      •   Electric submersible pumps

2.2.2.1 Gas Lift
     Gas  lift is used to lighten the liquid hydrostatic head, reduce the fluid viscosity, reduce pipe
        friction and supplies additional energy to help lift the contents of the tubing out of the well.

      Require gas lift mandrels to be installed at selected depths along the tubing string to optimise
      the flow rate.

     Gas  lift valves add potential leak paths to the tubing string and gas  lift wells often require
       additional wireline intervention to change out gas  lift valves to ensure that optimum well
      performance is maintained.

2.2.2.2 Electric Submersible Pumps (ESP)
     ESPs are used to move large liquid volumes with low gas to liquid ratios from water wells, high
      water cut oil wells and high deliverability oil wells.

     As they are powered by electricity, a power cable must be run down the outside of the tubing
     and through the wellhead.

       Reliability of this equipment can vary significantly due to a multitude of reasons.

3.0  Completion Equipment

      This section is designed to explain the major components that are found in completions. It is not
      suggested that every completion has all of these components.

     The reason for including components will vary considerably. The following reasons should be
      considered:

      •   Primary pressure control (such as a tree)
      •   Regulating flow (from the reservoir or further up the tubing)
      •  Emergency control of flow (e.g. a safety valve)
      •   Injection of chemicals
      •   Data acquisition
      •   Pressure or temperature control e.g. insulation
      •    Artificial lift
      •   Workover capabilities

3.1  Christmas Tree
     The christmas tree is the pressure control system located at the well head. The tree consists of
     a series of valves that provides the interface between the reservoir, completion and through to
      the production facilities. There are many other aspects to the purpose of the christmas tree such
      as:

      •  To provide a pressure tight barrier between the reservoir and surface.
      •  A method that allows controlled production or injection.

                                   Page 6 of 25                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 312 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      •  To kill the well prior to workover operations or maintenance.
      •  A system that permits the deployment of intervention work strings.

     The type of Christmas tree to be used has a large impact on the completion costs, the
      completion design and the intervention capabilities. Essentially there are two main type of tree,
      these are Surface Trees and Subsea Trees.

3.1.1 Surface Trees
      •   Conventional flanged trees are used on most land and low-to-moderate rate offshore wells.
      •   Solid block trees are sometimes used offshore, especially for high pressure or high rate
          wells under critical service conditions since they reduce the number of turbulence raisers
        and potential leak points. Under highly turbulent conditions, a Y configuration is available for
          the side outlets.
      •   Horizontal Spool Trees. In this configuration the tree is installed before the BOPs. The
          casing and tubing is then installed through the tree All the tree valves are located on the
          side of the vertical bore and are therefore ‘horizontal’.

3.1.2 Subsea Trees
      •   Conventional dual bore trees. These have two vertical bores for access to the production
          tubing and the annulus. They are designated by the size of the bores e.g. 4 x 2, 5 x 2 or 7 x
           2. As the access to the annulus is through the tree, any special considerations such as gas
                   lift must be addressed.
      •   Horizontal Spool Trees. As in the surface horizontal trees, the BOP is run above the tree.
      •   Inline trees. These are a new development where the tree valves are housed within the
         wellhead and are part of the completion
.
3.1.3 Tree Choice
      Horizontal trees have the key advantage that the tree does not have to be pulled in order to pull
      the tubing. This has the potential to save considerable time and money when performing
      interventions such as ESP replacements. In addition, as  all the valves are away from the
       vertical bore the installation and landing off of additional strings inside the tubing is easier. This
     opens up more opportunities for retrofit gas  lift, coiled tubing deployed pumps and velocity
       strings.

    A second master valve is usually required for sour and critical wells and where valve servicing is
        difficult (e.g. on subsea and satellite wells). This may also be specified in local regulations.
    Some companies specify a second manual master valve below any valve that is part of the ESD
     system to facilitate servicing because of the risk of wear from spurious shutdowns.

     Two side outlets are usually specified  for sour high pressure and  critical wells to allow
     permanent installation of a kill line. This may also be specified in the local regulations, facility
      safety philosophy or certification requirements. It is also convenient for valve equalisation and
       well clean up.

     Where frequent through-tubing workover or wireline operations are expected, a swab valve is
      usually specified. Alternatively, the swab valve can be temporarily installed onto, or in place of,
      the tree cap during well entry operations.

     The production wing valve, choke and flowline valve arrangement must consider how the well is
       to be brought on and shut down, how off take will be controlled and how the main ESD valves
        will be equalised. If a motorised adjustable choke is used, this should normally be of the full
      closing type that can withstand the jet erosion during opening.

     The pressure losses across the Christmas  tree, choke and flowline connection must be
      considered in the well deliverability analysis and can often be significantly reduced at the
     maximum well capacity by avoiding turbulence and sudden direction changes.




                                   Page 7 of 25                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 313 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

     The location of chemical injection points and the rate of fluid supply should be addressed,
       particularly where chemical injection is required into the tubing to protect the DHSV and tree
      from gas hydrates or to equalise the ESD valves before opening.
          If the tree valves are automated, it is highly desirable to have a staged ESD sequence in which
      the wing or flowline valve closes first to stop the flow, before the SCSSV and master valve start
       to close. In cold climate gas wells, it is common for the lowest of the master valve to be further
      delayed on low level alarms to ensure that some methanol is dumped onto the SCSSV before
      the well is fully isolated.

3.2  Well Head
     The wellhead transfers the casing and completion loads to the ground via the surface casing
     and provides a seal system and valves to control access to the tubing and annulus. It is made
     up of one or more casing head spools, the tubing head spool, the hanger and the xmas tree.

     Wellhead specifications are laid out in API Specification 6A, which was extensively revised in
      October 1989.

          It will primarily be the responsibility of the casing design to specify the requirements for the
      wellhead. The completion will however impact the wellhead selection in a number of ways:

      •  Loads will be transferred from the tubing to the wellhead through the tubing hanger. This is
          not normally a problem unless the wellhead is on a Tension Leg Platform (TLP).
      •   With a surface wellhead, there may be the requirement for injection into the annulus through
          the wellhead (gas lift, jet pumps, inhibitors or injection water). The metallurgy and size of the
           port will need to be considered for pressure drops, erosion and corrosion aspects as well as
          pressure and temperature limits. Additional valves (actuated or manual) may be required for
            integrity assurance or control.
      •   Certain parts of the wellhead will be exposed to annulus fluids (i.e. the production casing
          hanger). This may impact their metallurgy.
      •  The monitoring of annulus pressures may be required. This  is  relatively easy on an
          accessible surface wellhead. For a subsea wellhead, this may require special non-intrusive
          sensors.

3.2.1 Tubing Hanger
     The tubing hanger’s function is to transfer the weight of the tubing to the wellhead and to
      contain the casing - tubing annulus fluid.

     There are five types of tubing hanger system in common use:

      •   Mandrel (doughnut) compression hangers (metal-to-metal or elastomeric type).
      •  Ram type tension hangers.
      •   Slip and seal assemblies.
      •   Direct suspension from the tree - e.g. horizontal trees.
      •   Sub-mudline tubing hangers or tubing hanger packers.

     The main problem with hanger selection occurs where the tubing is to be landed in tension (e.g.
       in some gas wells), when this is applied mechanically rather than hydraulically.

     The number of vertical bores required through the tubing hanger for flow or supply conduits,
       control lines, chemical injection lines and cables should be specified. These can be sealed with
     a stab seal or an annular seal ring seal on an extended neck hanger. On subsea wells, a
       vertical bore is also required for the annulus access, and proper orientation of the hanger with
      respect to the guide base must be addressed.

     The method by which the main bores will be plugged at surface during removal of the BOPs or
      Christmas tree should be considered. There are two main options:

      •  Use of a plug profile in the hanger. This can be for either a plug or check valve run on rods,
           or more commonly today a conventional nipple profile.  It is particularly useful to have a

                                   Page 8 of 25                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 314 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

          tubing hanger running tool and landing string that is slightly larger than the tubing being run.
          This allows the use of a nipple profile that does not impact the rest of the completion.
      •  Use a wireline profile located below the hanger. This arrangement is most useful in subsea
           wells  if when running plugs into the nipple the running tool would sit inside the tree and  if
          stuck may prevent closure of valves. Note: by having the nipple below the hanger,  it is
          harder to access if plugs are stuck or debris falls on top of plugs. On a subsea well annulus
          bore, the use of nipple below the hanger is recommended as in this case a stuck plug can if
          required be punched above.

3.3  Sub Surface Safety Valve (SSSV)
      Subsurface safety valves (SSSVs) are installed below the wellhead to prevent uncontrolled flow
       in an emergency situation. In the worst case, when the wellhead has suffered severe damage,
      the SSSV may be the only means of preventing a blowout. The correct design, application,
       installation and operation of this equipment is fundamental to the safety of the well. SSSVs
      should be considered for  all wells capable of natural flow. In many locations government
      regulations require the use of SSSVs. In areas like offshore UK, Norway and USA, government
      regulations dictate that the valve must comply with API Specification 14A.

3.3.1 Definitions
    SSSVs can either be surface controlled or subsurface controlled. Subsurface controlled valves
      are controlled by well pressure, by the flow itself or as a result of a pressure differential caused
     by the flow. This type of valve’s dependency on well conditions as a means of control, makes
     them inherently less reliable than surface controlled valves, and their application is therefore
       limited. Surface controlled subsurface safety valves (SCSSV) are normally closed, and they are
      usually held open by an external pressure applied from surface. Some SCSSVs are controlled
     by electric, electromagnetic or acoustic signals. However, by far the most common form of
       control  is hydraulic pressure applied from surface via a control  line. When the hydraulic
      pressure is lost, the valve is closed by means of a spring acting on the closure mechanism. In
      order to close the valve, this spring must overcome the hydrostatic pressure in the control line.
     Each SCSSV therefore has a maximum safe setting depth. Regulations in most offshore
      locations require the use of SCSSVs.

3.3.2 Closure Mechanisms
    SCSSVs have three main closure mechanisms:

      •   Flapper
      •   Ball
      •   Poppet

      Flapper and ball closure mechanisms are the most commonly used. Poppet mechanisms are
     sometimes used  in equalisation devices (see below) and annular systems. As the name
      suggests, annular systems are used to isolate the annulus, e.g. in concentric gas lift systems or
     subsea wells.

     The flapper type of mechanism is now strongly preferred to the ball mechanism as a result of:

      •   Greater reliability
      •   Simpler design.
      •   Less prone to seal damage.
      •   In the event of a failure, the valve can be pumped through at sufficiently high rates to kill the
            well.

     To open the valve, pressure is applied via the control line, compresses the closing spring and
     moves the flow tube down onto the flapper. As the flow tube continues to move down, the
       flapper rotates about its hinge into the flapper housing. When control line pressure is removed,
      the spring forces the flow tube up, allowing the spring on the flapper to bring the flapper into the
      closed position. In the closed position the flapper is held closed by the differential pressure
      across the valve.

                                   Page 9 of 25                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 315 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


     The ball valve is operated in a similar manner, except in this case the hydraulic pressure acts
     on a piston, which rotates the ball by means of a mechanical linkage.

     The poppet mechanism simply relies on a conical shaped poppet sealing against a metal seat.

3.3.3 Certification
        All sub surface safety valves require certification:

      •    All critical components are traceable to mill heat reports.
      •   Design qualified through function test.
      •  A product manufactured, inspected and functionally tested to API 14A.

     API 14A has three standard classifications of service:

      Class 1 Standard Service. Suitable for service in oil and gas wells where  it is not exposed to
     sand production or stress corrosion cracking.

      Class 2 Sandy Service. In addition to Class 1, the valve is also suitable for use in oil or gas
      wells where solids, e.g. sand, could be expected to cause valve malfunction or failure.

      Class 3 Stress Corrosion Cracking Service. In addition to Classes 1 and 2, the valve is suitable
       for use in oil or gas wells where corrosive agents could cause stress corrosion cracking. Within
      Class 3 there are two subdivisions, 3S for sulphide stress cracking and 3C for chloride stress
      cracking.

3.3.4 Types Of SCSSV
       In addition to the type of closure mechanism, SCSSVs can be further subdivided into four main
      categories:

      •   Wireline or tubing retrievable.
      •   Non-equalising or self-equalising.
      •   Concentric or rod piston.
      •   Single control line or dual balanced lines.

    A valve may have any particular combination of these features, e.g. tubing retrievable, self-
      equalising concentric piston with a single control  line. The selected configuration  will be
     governed by well conditions, the completion design and previous experience.

      Selecting a self-equalising valve provides operational flexibility in that no external source of
      pressure is required to pressurise above the valve prior to opening the valve. However, the self-
      equalising feature introduces an additional potential failure mechanism and must therefore have
     an impact on reliability. When to use self-equalisation will depend on the operating environment
     and whether such a feature will provide a significant advantage in operating the field, e.g. self-
      equalising valves are a virtual necessity on unmanned satellite platforms in the North Sea.

     The hydraulic power for SCSSVs is delivered by means of a single concentric piston or one or
     more rod pistons mounted radially around the valve. Limits on the available control line pressure
       dictate a maximum setting depth for a valve. If a valve is to be set deeper than about 800 ft, e.g.
     subsea or below permafrost, then the large spring force and resulting high opening pressure
      required by a concentric valve make this valve inappropriate, and a rod piston valve should be
        utilised.

3.3.4.1 Tubing Retrievable or Wireline Retrievable.
     The statistics on reliability indicate that tubing retrievable downhole safety valves are more
       reliable than wireline retrievable valves. Mean time to failure  is approximately 6 years for
       wireline valves and 15 years for tubing retrievable valves. Tubing retrievable valves are also full
      bore and allow for easier access. Tubing retrievable valves can usually be converted into

                                   Page 10 of 25                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 316 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

       wireline retrievable valves through wireline intervention. Tubing retrievable surface controlled
      subsurface safety valves are therefore the most reliable and common valves. Their position is
      dictated by various considerations:

       1. The valve OD often impacts casing designs. For example 7” valves require 10¾” casing. 5½”
         valves may also not fit inside 9 5/8” casing if large cables or lines are required to go around
         the valve or  if a pressure rating of 10,000 psi or more is required. 4½” valves may not  fit
          inside 7” casing.
       2. They should be below platform piles or the probable crater depth in the event of a blowout.
       3.  If they are of a self-equalising design, they should ideally be positioned below the hydrate
         formation depth (determined from the geothermal gradients).
       4.  If adjacent drilling is going on with simultaneous production, the downhole safety valve can
        be used during the drilling of the top hole section. It is closed to mitigate the consequences
          of a collision. This avoids the need to run plugs into and out of the well.
       5. Local regulations.

     Most designs prefer to be located above or below kick off points.

     The setting depth of the valve must be such that in the event of a control line leak, the valve fail
      safes in the closed position. This is a function of the valve design and the annulus fluid. It is also
        vital that the control system is capable of opening the valve with the highest expected tubing
      pressure at the valve. There have been instances of control systems that have been designed
      with inadequate pressures.

3.3.4.2 Tubing Retrievable Surface Controlled Sub Surface Safety Valve
      (TRSCSSV)
      Hydraulic pressure acting on the concentric rod piston arrangement, which is connected to the
      flow tube, operates the subsurface TRSCSSV. As the rod piston moves downwards the flow
      tube in turn pushes through the flapper valve and thereby provides flow through the valve to
      surface. When hydraulic pressure is bled of the control line the power spring pushes the flow
      tube and rod piston upwards and allows the flapper valve close. In order to close the valve, this
      spring must overcome the hydrostatic pressure in the control line. Each SCSSV therefore has a
     maximum safe setting depth.

    TRSCSSVs incorporate a system whereby a wireline set safety valve can be installed. This
      operation would only be carried out should the safety valve fail to hold differential pressure or
         fail to function. There are typically wireline runs associated with the installation of the insert
      safety valve, generally these are as follows:

       1.  Run in hole and lock out the flapper valve.
       2.  Run in hole with communication tool and function communication system to open position.
           This provides communication through to the tubing via the safety valve control line and
            control chamber.
       3.  Run in hole with and set the insert safety valve. The insert safety valve straddles the
          communication system thus providing hydraulic integrity necessary to the operation and
            functionality of the insert safety valve.

3.3.4.3 Wireline Retrievable
     As with the tubing retrievable valve the wireline retrievable valve is operated from a surface
       control panel and via a control line that connects into the safety valve nipple. When assembled
       to an appropriate lock system the safety valve is installed and retrieved utilising wireline and
      landed in a safety valve nipple.

3.3.4.4 Concentric or Rod Piston.
     The hydraulic power for TRSCSSVs is delivered by means of a single concentric piston or one
      or more rod pistons mounted radially around the valve. The newer generation of valves tends to
     be of the rod piston variety and are particularly appropriate for hostile environments as the
      smaller diameter rod piston allows the use of metal-to-metal sealing throughout the valve. Rod


                                   Page 11 of 25                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 317 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      piston valves do, however, have the disadvantage of having less opening and closing force and
     as such are more prone to sticking when scale, solids or asphaltenes are present. In addition to
      the factors above, past experience of the valves performance in similar conditions should be
     used to decide both the types of valve and the particular model.

3.3.4.5 Surface Controlled.
     The  hydraulic system  for a SCSSSV comprises surface  control panel,  control  line and
      accessories and control line fluid. Viscosity, density and cleanliness are important factors in
      selecting a control line fluid. The density obviously affects the hydrostatic head on the valve,
     and the viscosity has an impact on the bleed down time. Decreasing viscosity with temperature
        is a critical factor in arctic service and North Sea subsea wells, and special liquids need to be
     used to take account of this. Mineral oil, known as HLP 32, is used as the standard control line
        fluid on North Sea platforms. On subsea wells, a 5:1 glycol erifon mixture diluted to a total of
    35% glycol and fresh water based HW 540 is typically used.

3.3.4.6 Velocity Controlled
     The Velocity Safety Valves are normally open-type valves that are closed by well flow in excess
       of the valve's preset closure flow rate. If loss of normal well control occurs at the surface, any
      increase in flow velocity causes the valve to close, thus shutting in the well downhole. This type
       of valve's dependency on well conditions as a means of control, makes them inherently less
       reliable than surface controlled valves, and their application is therefore limited. The valve will
      re-open once pressures across the closed pressure are equalised. The Velocity Safety Valves
      are normally equipped with an equalising sub-assembly which permits self-equalising prior to
       retrieving the valve, and are compatible with a variety of wireline locks. Adjustment of the valve
      closure mechanism is accomplished by changing the orifice size and internal spring rate. This
      requires specific well information and is accomplished through the use of a computer program
      designed for this purpose.

3.3.4.7 Injection Controlled
     The Injection Controlled Valves are normally closed valves that are designed to automatically
       shut-in the tubing in the event injection is stopped or flow reverses. Injection pressure opens the
      valve by creating a pressure drop across the orifice that allows the spring guide to push past the
       flapper to the open position When injection ceases, the spring guide allows the flapper to close.

3.3.5 Annular Safety System (ASV)
     The Annulus Safety System is based around a retrievable packer designed to anchor the tubing
       string in the casing at a point below the wellhead. The Pack Off Tubing Hanger (POTH) seals
      the area between the casing ID and the tubing OD and also provides seal bores suitable for the
      production of an isolated flow path for gas injection. The tubing anchor is designed primarily to
      allow retrieval of the upper completion without the need for rotation. The annulus safety valve
      provides a method of controlling the annulus fluid flow and will close automatically should
       control fluid pressure be lost.

     The complete system will serve as a redundant wellhead capable of carrying the weight of the
      tubing string safely in the event of catastrophic failure.

     The slip and packing element system used in the system hanger are designed to distribute the
      loads from both the sealed in pressure and the full weight of the supported tubing string safely
       into the casing. The system is designed to transmit these loads without damaging the casing,
     even if the casing is unsupported.

     The hanger is retrieved on drillpipe using a specially designed retrieving tool.

      Primary applications include gas  lift installations and wells where pressurisation of the upper
      casing annulus as a result of a downhole leak  is not permissible. Secondary applications
      include tension leg platforms where the system can be used to guarantee that minimum tubing
       string weight is suspended from the platform.


                                   Page 12 of 25                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 318 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


3.3.6 Non-Equalising or Self-Equalising.
      Non-equalising valves are superior in sealing reliability to self-equalising valves, this due to a
      simpler design and reduced leak paths, they however require the tubing pressure to be
      equalised above the safety valve in order for it to be opened. Selecting a self-equalising valve
      provides operational flexibility in that no external source of pressure is required to equalise the
      pressure above the valve prior to opening the valve. However, the self-equalising feature
      introduces an additional potential failure mechanism and must therefore have an impact on
        reliability. When to use self-equalisation will depend on the operating environment and whether
     such a feature will provide a significant advantage in operating the field, e.g. self-equalising
      valves are a virtual necessity on unmanned satellite platforms in the North Sea.

     The equalising feature will also determine the depth of the valve. If equalisation is required, it is
       better to have the valve shallow in order to reduce the amount of liquids that have to be
     pumped. Likewise wax or hydrates may force a self-equalising valve to be set deeper.

3.3.7 Single Control Line or Dual Balanced Lines.
     To overcome some of the problems of limited setting depth, a dual control line balanced valve
     can be proposed. In a balanced valve, a second control line is run to the valve and filled with the
     same fluid as the main control line. The fluid in the second line balances the hydrostatic
      pressure on the piston regardless of setting depth. In theory, this should give the valve unlimited
       setting depth. However, the time required to displace the fluid to surface limits the valve's
      response time and hence setting depth. Although these valves have a deep setting capability,
      they are not recommended for a number of reasons. In particular, they are prone to failing open.
          If gas migrates  into the balance  line and reduces the hydrostatic pressure, the  original
      hydrostatic pressure in the control line is no longer balanced and can be sufficient to open the
      valve without any applied surface pressure. This will cause the valve to fail open.

    A valve may have any particular combination of these features, e.g. tubing retrievable, self-
       equalising, concentric piston with a single control line. Well conditions, the completion design
     and previous experience will govern the selected configuration.

3.4  Blast Joints, Flow Couplings and Pup Joints

3.4.1 Flow Couplings
     Flow couplings are short sections of thick walled pipe. They are manufactured from bar stock
      (as are most completion accessories). The flow coupling is normally manufactured with a wall
      thickness equal to that of the tubing ID through to coupling OD. Flow couplings should be
      considered above and below any major ID change i.e. crossovers, Tubing Retrievable Safety
      Valves, wireline nipples etc. The purpose of this is to withstand any erosion caused by turbulent
      flow through differing tubing ID's and therefore promotes enhanced completion reliability of the
      production life of the well.

      Accelerated erosion is induced by landing nipples and by any item that causes an abrupt
     change in flow area. Erosion is accelerated due to abrupt entry to a restriction and an abrupt
        exit. Therefore, a flow coupling below a landing nipple is as important as one above. The most
        critical area is at the point of entry below the subsurface control device. A good practice is to
     have a lower flow coupling length that will cover the subsurface flow control below the nipple.
     Above the flow coupling or a safety valve an adequate length is twenty times the ID, although a
     minimum of 36” is recommended.

3.4.2 Blast Joints
     Flow couplings are designed to withstand internal erosion caused by turbulent flow. Blast joints
        differ by with withstanding erosion externally, and are normally positioned either side of a sliding
      sleeve situated at perforated production zones where the jetting action of the fluid can erode the
      outside of the tubing. A blast joint is a joint of tubing with enhanced wall thickness, and is



                                   Page 13 of 25                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 319 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      usually manufactured from a heat treated alloy. 415H alloy has been shown by tests to be a
     good material. Tungsten carbide or stellite can be used as a coating.

3.4.3 Pup Joints
     Pup joints are short tubing joints that give flexibility in attaining a desired tubing length e.g. when
      spacing out the completion. This is important particularly while landing off the completion. They
      are also utilised above and below completion accessories as part of a completion module
     assembly and transported to the well site. This allows for easy, safe handling and controlled
     make up torque below and above the assembly. It is recommended that all completion modules
     have a 5’ or greater pup joint at each end.

    When using pup joints for space-outs a limited range of sizes is required. As tubing is made up
       in length ranges,  it is easy to put aside extremes of the range during the tubing layout. In this
     manner only 3 or 4 pup joints are required (say 5’, 10’ and 20’).

3.5  Landing Nipples
      Landing nipples also known as Wireline or seating nipples provide a location point for various
      flow control devices in the production string. Typically landing nipples are short tubular sections
      with an internally machined profile. This profile usually consists of a landing and locking profile
       to locate and hold the wireline lock, and a polished packing bore or sealing section.

     There are two main categories of landing nipples non-selective and selective:

      •   Non-selective nipples, or what are commonly called no-go nipples, rely on the nipple having
        a smaller ID (no-go) than the lock. This reduction in ID can either be at the top (top no-go)
           or bottom (bottom no-go) of the nipple and is used to locate the lock. Once the lock is
          located on the no-go, it is then in the correct position to allow the locking dogs to be jarred
            into the locked position.
      •   Selective nipples utilise a different method of locating the wireline lock and do not rely on a
          reduction  in ID. There are two basic methods, one where the nipples have different
           selective profiles, or the alternative where the profiles are all the same and the selectivity is
         achieved by the running and setting operation. With different selective profiles  in the
           nipples, the locking dogs on the lock must match the appropriate nipple. Each lock can
          therefore be run through a series of nipples until  it reaches the nipple with the matching
            profile. Using the running and setting operation to achieve selectivity allows all nipples to be
         accessed with one lock, whereas the selective nipples obviously require a different lock for
         each nipple.

      Selective nipples have the advantage of being able to maintain the same ID throughout the
      completion, whereas each no-go nipple requires a step down in ID. This can be important in
      smaller completions.

     However, this advantage does have an associated drawback in that all the selective nipples
     have the same packing bore. This means that if a plug is to be located in the bottom nipple, the
      packing stacks have to be jarred through  all the packing bores in the upper nipples. This
     exposes the packing stacks to a high risk of damage before it reaches the appropriate nipple,
     and for this reason selective nipples are not recommended, particularly in large tubing sizes.

     The location and size of each wireline nipple should be carefully considered in the planning
      stages of the completion to allow maximum versatility in the positioning of various flow control
      accessories.

      Wireline nipples may be used for the following operations:

      •  Land blanking plugs as a barrier or to test the production tubing.
      •  Land blanking plugs to provide a means of setting hydraulically actuated completion tools.
      •  Land velocity type safety valves - sub surface controlled safety valves (SSCSV).
      •  Land chokes to reduce surface flowing pressures or have pressure drops downhole to
          preventing surface freezing in gas production.


                                   Page 14 of 25                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 320 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      •  Land valve catchers to aid recovery of accidentally dropped gas  lift valves during change
           outs.
      •  When installed above blast joints with a polished nipple below, separation sleeves may be
           installed to repair any damaged or eroded blast joints.
      •  Land instrument hangers with devices such as flow meters, thermometers and pressure
         gauges.

3.5.1 Wireline Locks
    A basic wireline lock consists of a fishing neck, expander mandrel, locking dogs or keys,
       retainer sleeve for the dogs, springs for the dogs, a packing mandrel and a packing stack.
      Although locks differ in their configuration, the basic function of the components remains the
     same.

     The fishing neck can either be internal or external and is used to attach the lock and associated
     equipment to the running or pulling tool. The expander mandrel when collapsed forces the dogs
      out into the profile in the landing nipple. Various methods are used to hold the mandrel in this
      collapsed position, thus locking the lock in the nipple. The Camco DB lock uses a collet
     mechanism, whereas the Baker Sur-Set uses a 'C'-ring. The running procedure for the locks
     depends on the selective mechanism. No-go locks and locks using selective profiles are run on
       wireline, and the spring loaded keys automatically locate the locks in their respective nipples.
     The locking mandrel is then jarred (driven) down, locking the keys securely in place. Where the
      lock itself is selective, the running procedure is as follows:

      •   Lock and running tool are run through the nipple.
      •  The assembly is then pulled back through the nipple, this activates the locking keys.
      •  The assembly is again lowered into the nipple, and the keys automatically locate in the
           nipple profile.
      •  The lock mandrel is then driven down, locking the keys in to the profile.

      With the lock set, the running tool is recovered by upward shearing, releasing  it from the lock
      mandrel. This procedure applies to all types of lock.

     The recovery is similar:

      •  The pulling tool is run and located in the fishing neck of the lock.
      •  Upward jarring is used to pull the lock mandrel up and allowing the keys to be released.
         Continued upward jarring frees the packing stack from the seal bore.
      •  The lock can then be recovered from the nipple.

3.5.2 Controlled ID Joint
      Controlled ID joints are essentially an evolution of flow couplings that provide a location and
      anchoring point for various flow control devices in the production string. Unlike landing nipples
       controlled ID joints do not have an internally machined profile. The flow control devices that are
      designed to locate and seal in controlled ID joints are equipped with a bi-directional slip system
       similar to most retrievable packers.

3.6  Sliding Sleeve
     The sliding sleeve is a device that allows communication between the tubing and the annulus
       for well  kill operations, circulation for tubing or annulus and selective zone production. The
       sliding sleeve is essentially full-opening with an inner sleeve that can be opened or closed by
     means of a wireline shifting tool. The main applications for a sliding sleeves include providing
       circulation   to  the  annulus  pre/post  workover,  multizone  completions  and  annulus
      communications for power fluid, e.g. jet pump installation. Sliding sleeves used to have a poor
      reputation for reliability in some areas, particularly where the sleeve remains unused for long
      periods, however recent modifications and  utilising non elastomeric seal technology has
     enhanced their efficiency. Sliding sleeves by design however create a potential leak path in the
      completion string and for this reason sliding sleeves are not generally recommended. With no


                                   Page 15 of 25                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 321 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

       sliding sleeve in the completion, a tubing punch is used to achieve communication prior to a
      workover.

     As standard the sliding sleeve is normally equipped with a nipple profile in the upper sub of the
      sleeve, with a polished seal bore above and below the ports, to accept a variety of locks,
      packing devices and accessories.
       Sliding sleeves may be use to establish communication between tubing and annulus for such
      operations as:

      •   Displacing the tubing or annulus fluid after the Xmas tree is installed.
      •   Selective testing, treating and production of individual zones in a multi zone selective well.
      •   Using tubing to "kick off,' the annulus to tubing in a dual string completion.
      •   Producing more than one zone through a single tubing string.
      •    Killing a well by circulation.
      •  Gas lifting.
      •   Landing a blanking plug in nipple profile to shut in well or when testing tubing.
      •   Landing commingling chokes in nipple profile.
      •   Circulating inhibitors for corrosion control.

3.7  Mandrels

3.7.1 Side Pocket Mandrels (SPMs)
     The side pocket mandrel (SPM), originally designed for gas  lift, can also be used as an
       alternative circulating device. The SPM uses valves that can be set or retrieved on wireline,
      using a kickover tool, which positions the device in the side pocket. When no communication is
      required, a dummy valve is located in the SPM. Working valves are usually activated by annular
      pressure and are used for gas  lift, circulation and chemical injection. SPMs have both merits
     and drawbacks as a communication device. Unlike the sliding sleeve, the flow control device
     can be removed without pulling the tubing. The mandrel also allows unrestricted flow through a
         full bore. However, the SPM has a large OD and requires a relatively large casing. Another
      disadvantage of the SPM is that debris can accumulate in the side pocket, making setting and
       retrieving the valve difficult.

3.7.2 Gauge Mandrel

3.7.2.1 Surface Read Out
     The Down Hole Permanent Gauge is a pressure monitoring system which facilitates real time
      surface data acquisition of down hole pressure fluctuations and reservoir depletion. These
     systems are commonly installed in Sub Sea developments where sub surface monitoring of the
      bottom hole conditions are an essential part of production management. Cost issues are also a
      deciding factor to the implementation of these systems e.g. costs associated with wireline run
     memory gauges where a Jack Up or Semi-Submersible rig would have to be positioned over the
       well to support wireline operations. There are also other issues attributed to an intervention style
      data acquisition such as personnel and equipment costs, equipment failure, miss- runs, safety
     and lost production during these operations. In recent years enhancements made to Down Hole
     Permanent Gauge Mandrels have confirmed to provide improved long term reliability and data
      accuracy.

      Reservoir pressure monitoring is useful for example for pressure maintenance information for
      preventing gas breakout in the reservoir.

      •   Bottom hole flowing pressure information. This can be useful so that the well can be
           controlled to prevent asphaltene deposition in the reservoir for example, or prevent gas
          breakout in the near well bore.
      •   Well productivity information - monitoring the well productivity will give early indications of
        many productivity problems. This enables preventative action or early remedial action to be
          scheduled. Examples include fines production or scale build-up.
      •   Natural  flow  well performance knowing  the bottom hole pressure  allows  the  tubing
         performance curves to be accurately correlated.  It also allows possible identification of

                                   Page 16 of 25                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 322 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

          increases in frictional pressure (scaling or corrosion of tubing) or lifting problems (liquid
          loading for example).
      •    Artificial  lift troubleshooting  - bottom hole flowing pressure (and other measurements
         perhaps) allows accurate estimates of the gas injection depth during gas  lift or free gas
          production for the suction of ESP's.
      •   Production allocation and well testing.  If downhole flowrates can be obtained, then the
          requirement for regular well tests reduces. This is especially useful for subsea wells tied
         back with a common flowline.

     The position of the gauge is therefore important.

3.7.2.2 Non Surface Read Out Gauge
     There are a variety of intervention systems for gauges:

      •   Traditional tailpipe nipple and perforated joint in tailpipe. This allows a memory gauge to be
          positioned below the packer. This system is tried and tested. The major problem is that the
        gauge creates a low flow spot in the well. This allows debris to build up on top of the gauge,
         making it hard or impossible to remove or change out the gauge.
      •   Fluted gauge hanger in nipple. This system uses any nipple to hang-off a gauge. The
         problem is that the flowrate may be restricted either by the gauge or the lock in the nipple.
      •   Retrievable gauges in a mandrel. Conventional gas  lift mandrels can be used to house
         gauges these gauges can either be internal or external sensing. They can be pre-installed
            in the completion and can be retrieved or replaced using conventional kick over tools. This
          technique is particularly suitable for use during stimulations, when gas lift valves often have
           to be pulled  to allow annulus pressure to be increased. The mandrels can also be
          constructed without a flow path to the annulus, thus avoiding a potential leak path.
      •   Interogatable gauges. This system also uses a gauge mandrel, but the gauges do not have
           to be pulled for the data to be extracted. An inductive coupling allows extraction of the data
          using slickline techniques. This avoids multiple wireline runs purely to extract data and
          allows data to be extracted if the gauges are stuck in the mandrel.
      •   Deployment of fibre optic sensors through a control line. The Sensor Highway system uses
        a conventional control line and fluid drag to deploy sensors (pressure, temperature, strain,
           noise, magnetic fields etc.) down a control line. The control line loops downhole and then
         back to surface.

3.7.3 Chemical Injection Mandrel
    A Chemical Injection Mandrel is a method of providing continuous downhole chemical injection
       to treat wells for the prevention of downhole corrosion, scaling, asphaltene formation etc. The
      chemical injection mandrel is installed in the completion string with a dedicated control line
      connected. When using injection mandrels  it may be possible to minimise the use of high
     chrome and exotic materials in completions.

     The main problem with injection mandrels is the blockage of the injection line. For this reason,
     as large as bore as possible is recommended and 3/8" or 1/2" is preferred. The standard control
       line size of 1/4" is very easily blocked.

3.8  Expansion Devices and Anchoring Methods

3.8.1 Polished Bore Receptacle (PBR)
     The Polished Bore Receptacle (PBR) is designed for use in those applications where extreme
      tubing movement needs to be accounted for. Where large tubing movements are encountered,
       correct selection of seal arrangements and elastomers is critical to maintaining integrity. Leaks
       in PBR assemblies  in water  injection wells have led to moves to design water  injection
      completions without moving  seals. The  retrievable PBR can be latched  into a  retainer
      production packer or liner hanger by means of an anchor tubing seal assembly. The PBR seal
     assembly is held in place inside the honed bore during run in by a shear ring. When combined
      with hydraulic set packers, the entire completion can be run in and set on the production tubing
       string in one trip. If desired the well can be flanged up and the tubing string displaced prior to

                                   Page 17 of 25                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 323 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

       setting the packer. The entire assembly above the packer is retrievable in two trips. The seal
     assembly is retrieved when tubing string is recovered. The PBR housing is easily recovered in a
     second trip using the specifically designed retrieving tool.

     The PBR has advantages over expansion joints in that the continuous tubing conduit is used
       offering  distinct advantages  for running intervention  tools. The inner mandrel  is normally
      equipped with a guide to assist plugging devices etc. back into the tubing conduit during
       intervention operations.

3.8.2 Expansion Joint Seal Assembly
     The Expansion Joint, is a telescoping tool that compensates for tubing movement. It is mainly
      intended as a simple space out device for landing the surface tubing hanger. This is particularly
      useful when there is another fixed point in the completion string relatively close to the surface.
       e.g. an annulus safety system.

     These seal assemblies perform the same function as a PBR and are essentially an inverted
    PBR with the seals located in the overshot and sealing on a polished tube. Because of the
      problems in sealing on the outside of a curved polished surface, especially with long seal
     movement,  i.e. extra long tubing seal receptacles (ELTSR), this type of assembly is more
        difficult to manufacture than a PBR. ELTSRs have tended to be run  in conjunction with
     permanent packers and therefore do not usually have as large an ID as the PBR.

3.8.3 Anchor Seal Nipple
     The Anchor Seal Nipple is an anchoring and sealing device that connects the retrievable tubing
       string to the upper bore of the Retainer Production Packer. The latch component of the seal
      nipple provides positive engagement with the packer, and the seal unit maintains the pressure
       integrity of the connection. The Anchor Seal Nipple can be supplied with appropriate Seal Units.

     The Anchor Seal Nipple to production packer system is required to meet the following:

      •  To provide a sealing safety barrier at the bottom of the tubing as near the productive zone
         as practicable. This is required to protect the production casing from the corrosive elements
           of the reservoir products and to protect the production casing from any high pressures
         experienced during operations such as well kill or stimulation.
      •  To facilitate well workover of damaged tubing without exposing the production zone to
        damaging fluids. This is achieved by means of placement of a wireline nipple profile in the
          production packer tailpipe assembly.
      •  To provide a tubing anchor point to minimise tubing movement or allow the attachment of a
          tubing expansion device.
      •  To assist in well killing operations by providing a positive safety barrier near the reservoir,
         which will result in the requirement for lower specific gravity, kill weight brines.
      •   Pressure integrity assurance to the liner top.
      •   Maximised ID.

      At the top of the packer is a square thread together with a seal bore. In most applications, this
      packer is run with an anchor (fixed) seal. which locates in the packer. Although the packer is
      permanent, the tubing can be removed by picking up approx. 5,000 - 10,000 lbs and rotating
      approx. 14 - 15 times to the right.

3.8.4 Shear Release Anchor
     The shear release anchor is a modified version of the conventional anchor and is equipped with
     a shear ring or shear pins The anchor design to be retrieved by a straight pull through the
       tubing. Particular attention to injection and stimulation stress analysis is required as the tubing
      contraction could exceed the force required to shear out the anchor. Picking up approx.-5,000 -
      10,000lbs and rotating approx. 14 - 15 times to the right can also disengage the anchor.





                                   Page 18 of 25                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 324 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

3.8.5 Hydraulic Release Anchor
     The Hydraulic Release Anchor Tubing Seal Assembly is a Tool ideally suited to be run between
     numerous  hydraulically set Packers run  in tandem where downward body movement  is
      necessary to complete pack-off. Once the release mechanism has functioned the tool is then
       free to stroke within the Packer upper seal bore due to tubing movement caused by pressure or
      temperature changes in the well.

     The release mechanism is actuated hydraulically with no tubing manipulation required.

     To suit multi zone completion designs tandem where packer downward body movement is
      necessary.

    No rotation required for retrieving. The Anchor retrieves fully when the packer is retrieved.

3.9  Production Packer
     The production packer is a mechanical device design to provide a seal area between the casing
      ID and the tubing OD. The packer is also equipped with a slip system that ensures that  it is
       firmly anchored to the casing/liner.

     Depending on the well, packers are used for one or more of the following reasons:

      •  To provide a sealing safety barrier at the bottom of the tubing as near to the productive
         zone as practicable. This is required to protect the production casing from the corrosive
         elements of the reservoir products and to protect the production casing from any high
          pressures experienced during operations such as well kill or stimulation.
      •  To facilitate well workover of damaged tubing without exposing the production zone to
        damaging fluids. This is achieved by means of placement of a retrievable plugging device in
          the production packer tailpipe assembly.
      •  To provide a tubing anchor point to minimise tubing movement.
      •  To assist in well killing operations by providing a positive safety barrier near the reservoir,
         which will result in the requirement for lower specific gravity and kill weight brines.
      •  To improve vertical flow conditions and prevent erratic flow and heading cycles.
      •  To separate pay zones in the same well bore in a multiple production string arrangement.
      •  To pack off perforations rather than squeezing cement (bridge plugs).
      •  To facilitate gas lift or hydraulic power fluid off the formation.
      •  To install a casing pump
      •  To minimise heat losses by use of empty annulus or thermal insulator
      •   Pressure integrity assurance to the liner top.
      •  To isolate casing leaks.
      •  To facilitate temporary well service operations (e.g. stimulations, squeezes) or well testing
          with Drill String Stem DST

3.9.1 Packer Components
     There are certain basic components that are common to all production packers.

     The seal assembly consists of the elastomer packing element together with back-up rings. This
      provides isolation between the annulus and the underside of the packer by packing off against
      the casing wall. One problem with packing elements is seal extrusion, which is overcome by the
      back-up rings. An alternative technique is to use a combination packing element, with a softer
       inside element providing the seal, and harder elements on the outside backing up the soft seal
     and preventing extrusion. The differential pressure a packer will hold is dependent on the stress
      induced in the element.

      This type of packer is set by means of hydraulic pressure in the tubing. The pressure acts on
      the piston, forcing the piston along the lock ring and pushing the bottom slip over the cone. The
     cones are basically metal wedges which force the toothed slips out into the casing wall. In this
      case, the slips on either side of the packing element are opposed (hold in opposite directions)
     and full circle. As the packer is set, these circumferential slips split into segments as they grip


                                   Page 19 of 25                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 325 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      the casing wall. Once the bottom slip contacts the casing wall, the load on the cone builds and
      the  pin  locating the cones shears,  allowing the element  to compress. As  the element
      compresses, the pin in the upper cone shears, forcing the upper slip out into the casing.

     Movement of the packing element while under differential pressure, will usually result in a
      packer failure. To avoid this, the lock ring, or ratchet, both locks the stress in the element and
      prevents the slips from disengaging.

      At the top of the packer is a square thread together with a seal bore. In most applications, the
      packer is run with an anchor (fixed) seal which locates in the packer. Although the packer is
      permanent, the tubing can be removed by picking up approximately 5,000 to 10,000 lbs and
       rotating approx. 15 times to the right. In the unlikely event that the packer needs to be removed,
       this can only be done by milling.

3.9.2 Permanent Verses Retrievable
     One trip permanent completions have gained widespread acceptance within the oil industry
     because of because of cost saving associated with reducing the time taken to  install the
      completion  in the well and bring the well  into production. One  trip single  string packer
      completions are  relatively straight forward and consequently have become a well proven
      technique. In fact  it is probably fair to say that most wells in the North Sea are equipped with
      hydraulic set permanent packers.

      Retrievable packer do have their place however and provided the well conditions are not too
      severe and not to many pressure reversals are encountered over the  life of the well the
       retrievable packer may perform satisfactorily.

3.9.3 Permanent Packer
     Permanent packers because of their simple rugged construction, are also inherently stronger
     and will generally have a larger through bore in any given casing size than the equivalent
       retrievable packer.

     Advantages

      •  The packing element system is more resistant to "Swab-Off,' during completion installation
      •   Mechanical strength once set in the casing the permanent packer is stronger and is more
           resistant to high loading in tension or compression.
      •   Full cycle slips distributes hydraulic and mechanical loading and minimises casing damage.
      •   Generally have a larger ID through the packer
      •   Normally have a higher differential pressure capability than retrievable packers.
      •  Few if any O-Rings are required.
      •   Disadvantages
      •  Can only be removed from the well bore by milling.
      •   Not re-usable once removed from the well bore.

3.9.4 Retrievable Packer
      Retrievable packer element design and construction is not so well boxed in as the permanent
      packer. Hydraulic and mechanical forces imparted to the element can cause some extrusion
     and movement of the rubber creating a potential leak path during pressure reversals.

     Advantages

      •  Can be removed from the well bore intact without milling
      •   Certain types of retrievable packer can be retrieved with the completion string
      •  Once removed may be re-usable after redress (depending on the severity of the well
          conditions i.e. how much corrosion pitting etc).





                                   Page 20 of 25                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 326 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


      Disadvantages

      •     If the packer cannot be removed by normal means, milling can be a long and problematic.
      •   Corrosion of the retrieving mechanism may impair retrievability.
      •  May not be so easy to provide compatibility with well conditions as certain components may
          require high strength materials.
      •     If corrosion resistant materials are used galling may occur and impair retrievability.

       In a nutshell the benefits of a permanent packer over a retrievable packer can be best summed
     up as "strength" and "durability".

     However a new generation of retrievable packer has been developed which can withstand
      greater loads than most permanent systems. The packer is essentially an adaptation of the
      annular safety system which is designed to withstand loads above 500,000 lbs in tension and
      the same in compression.

     Advantages

      •     If preset it can be removed from the well bore intact without milling.
      •   In workover mode can be removed from the well bore intact without milling.
      •  Once removed may be re-usable after redress (depending on the severity of the well
          conditions i.e. how much corrosion pitting etc).
      •   Eliminates the requirement for an expansion device as the packer can withstand the tubing
          loads.
      •   Tubing  is connected  directly  to the top  of the packer and eliminates any  potential
          elastomeric leak path.
      •   Corrosion of the retrieving mechanism is protected by a puncture retrieval system.

      Disadvantages

      •     If the packer cannot be removed by normal means, milling can be a long and problematic
          operation.

3.9.5 Retrieving and Milling
     There are generally four methods of packer retrieval, this depends on the individual packer
      design.

     Permanent packers are the most difficult, time consuming and costly to retrieve. In order to
       retrieve a permanent packer the anchor has to backed out of the packer and the tubing
     removed from the well. A milling tool is then made to the drill string and run into the well. If the
       milled packer is to be retrieved from the well then the milling tool has to be engaged and the
      catch sleeve un-jayed. An overpull will confirm the milling tool has engaged the packer. The
       rotary table and mud pumps can now be started and the weight slowly set down on the packer.
     As the milling tool cuts down over the outside of the packer it will eventually drop onto the catch
      sleeve of the milling tool. Once this happens the rotary and the mud pumps are stopped. The
      packer can now be pulled from the well.

      Retrievable packer (depending on their design) can be retrieved in one of two ways

       1. Using retrieving tools.
       2. Tubing manipulation.

    When retrieving tools are utilised the packer is retrieved in a similar fashion to the permanent
      packer. The anchor and tubing has to removed first, and a separate trip with a work string is
      required. In this case the retrieving tool takes the place of the milling tool. Once the retrieving
       tool has engaged the packer a straight pull upwards is all that is required to retrieve the packer.

    Some retrievable packers can be retrieved by tubing manipulation. This can take the form of a
       straight pull or tubing rotation.

                                   Page 21 of 25                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 327 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


3.9.6 Mechanical Set Packer
      Mechanical set packers are frequently deployed in multi-zone completions, well tests and when
       utilised as a sump packer for water shut off. When completing a well with a mechanical set
      packer the packer is required to be installed prior to the tubing. To install the packer requires a
      separate run with hydraulic setting tool, this is normally performed in one of two methods:

       1. On an Electric line Setting tool. This system is generally recommend for setting packers
            vertical or low angle well as deployment of the packer is relatively quick, efficient and cost
            effective.
       2. On a Drill Pipe Setting Tool. These setting assemblies are particularly useful for setting
         packers in high-angle, deviated.

      Regardless of what method is adopted the hydraulic force applied to the setting sleeve from the
       setting tool initiates the setting action from the top of the packer downwards. This force is
      transmitted to the upper slips through to the packing element and on to the lower slips. As a
       result the slips and packing element expand outwards which in turn anchor and pack off against
      the casing. The pack off force is governed by a shear stud or ring contained within the setting
        tool, the shear stud or ring shears as the pack off force exceeds their predetermined values
      allowing the setting to disengaged from the packer and retrieved.

3.9.7 Hydraulic Set Packer
     The Hydraulic Set Packer is a development of the mechanically set packer. The advantage with
       this system is that  it can be run and set in a single trip with the completion tubing string.  If
      required the completion can be deployed and the tubing hanger landed and tested prior to
       setting the packer. The setting system is actuated by installing a plugging device located below
      the packer and pressuring up the tubing above, this allows pressure to enter the setting port and
      actuated setting piston. The setting piston transmits the force though the lower slips, packing
      element to the upper slips as with the mechanical set system the slips and packing element
     expand outwards which in turn anchor and pack off against the casing. The setting piston cross
      section area and hydraulic pressure govern the pack off force.

3.9.8 Dual Bore Packer
      Dual bore packers are commonly utilised in multi string completions and by design can allow
      independent production of each zone through separate tubing strings, and can permit gas or
      water / gas injection in one zone while producing from the other.

      Dual bore packers are installed and set by installing a plugging device located below the packer
     and pressuring up the tubing above, this allows pressure to enter the setting port and actuate
      the setting piston.

      Retrieval is normally achieved by a straight pull through the tubing. Particular attention to inject
     and stimulation stress analysis is required as the tubing contraction could exceed the force
      required to retrieve the packer

3.9.9 Mill Out Extension (MOE)
     Most production packers are run and installed with a mill out extension mounted on the bottom
      guide immediately below the packer. The MOE will have a larger ID than the packer and
      production tubing below, this will facilitate the catch sleeve on the milling tool.

3.9.10 Seal Bore Extension (SBE)
    A Seal Bore Extension is used to provide an additional sealing bore when a long seal assembly
        is run to accommodate tubing movement. The seal bore extension has the same ID as the
      packer ID. Packers that have continuous seal bore extensions and no mill out extension can be
       milled and retrieved utilising a specially designed milling tool and spear. Alternatively, they can
     be milled over and pushed to bottom.


                                   Page 22 of 25                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 328 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


      Seal bore extensions are normally supplied in standard lengths and can be joined together with
      concentric couplings to achieve any length required.

3.10 Remote Actuated Tools
     Remote actuated tools sometimes referred to as "smart" tools are items of equipment that do
      not require any intervention runs such as wireline, coil tubing, or snubbing to operate them.
     These tools are relatively new and are designed and ideally suited to highly deviated or
       horizontal wells where intervention would be extremely costly and difficult or even impossible.
     The following operations can be achieved with remote actuated tools:

      •   Pressure test tubing prior to setting hydraulic set packer.
      •   Setting hydraulic set packer.
      •   Provide a barrier from the reservoir to surface.
      •   Provide a barrier from the tubing to reservoir (loss circulation device).
      •   Provide a means of attaining annulus to tubing communication.

     Remotely actuated tools can be operated in a variety of different ways the most common being
       hydraulic. However  this method  is not always ideal and can be restricted by completion
     component design  limitations. Consequently by  utilising a combination of tools which are
      operated in different ways the completion objectives can still be accomplished.

3.10.1 Schlumberger Liner Top Isolation Device (LTIV)
     The Schlumberger LTIV is a device located at the liner top that isolates the reservoir from the
      tubing and can hold pressure in either direction. It has a ball sealing system that when in the
      closed position provides protection to a pre-perforated reservoir or sand screens and allows the
       installation of the upper completion.

     The LTIV is pressure cycle operated tool that utilises a nitrogen chamber and an indexing
     mechanism for its operation. A series of pressure cycles applied in the tubing to open the ball
      valve and gain  full bore access to the reservoir. The ball valve can also be opened using
      contingency intervention tool should the system fail. The LTIV can also be set up on surface to
     open at a pre-determined number of cycles.

3.10.2 Ocre Tools
      Muti-function Cycle Tool - Full Bore Isolation Valve (MFCT-FBIV)

     Ocre tools (MFCT-FBIV) are designed to install the completion self filling and when desired
       isolate the tubing from annulus and set a hydraulic set packer. Tubing pressure integrity is
      maintained by a flapper valve, which holds pressure from above and below and therefore can
     be classed as a  barrier, when open   it provides  full bore access below and above the
      completion. The Ocre tools are also manipulated by pressure cycles and utilises a ratcheting
     system and can also be set up to operate at a predetermined number of cycles. The flapper
      valve can also be opened using contingency intervention tool should the system fail.

3.10.3 Hydrostatic Tools
      Hydrostatic tools utilise a hydrostatic chamber and a rupture disc system to actuate. The
       reservoir has to be isolated by casing in order for this type of tool to operate. A hydrostatically
      operated tool does not require a plugging device located in the tubing below and is equipped
      with a atmospheric chamber that is actuated simply by pressuring up the whole well bore, unlike
      conventional hydraulically operated tools that require a pressure differential from tubing to
      annulus.

      Close attention must be giving to the pressure rating of the rupture disc as this is affected by
      hydrostatic pressure. If this is overlooked then this could cause the tools to operate prematurely.




                                   Page 23 of 25                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 329 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

3.10.4 Baker Oil Tools Edge System
     The EDGE system uses a pulse frequency based communication technique to actuate and
      manipulate downhole completion tools equipped with onboard electronics. The downhole tools
      (which may include permanent or retrievable packers, sliding sleeves, etc and are programmed
       at surface to recognise one of 16 discreet actuation commands from a portable terminal unit.
     Once  in position, the tools are actuated using a sophisticated, computerised Supervisory
      Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system to precisely control the actuation frequency
      imparted onto the tubing fluid. The SCADA system also allows the operator to gauge the quality
       of pulses delivered, thus ensuring that communication has been established. As many as 16
      devices can be actuated independently of one another in a single well bore; and, since the
     system is independent of absolute pressure in the tubing, there is no need to install a tubing
      plug to set a packer.

     By using systems equipped for electronically enhanced remote actuation, tubing tests can be
      performed at the full rating of the tubing. The advantage with system is that there are no limiting
      pressure cycles involved.

3.10.5 Halliburton Mirage Disappearing Plug
     The Mirage disappearing plug can withstand pressure from above and below and can be
      considered as a barrier. This device is also a pressure cycle operated tool, and the plug itself it
     made from a salt based material, which is soluble in fluid. After a pre-determined number of
      pressure cycles the plug disintegrates allowing full bore access above and below.

3.10.6 PES Anvil Plug
     The PES Anvil Plug has a solid metal plate that can withstand pressure from above and below
     and is considered to be a barrier. When on depth the application of 4,000psi tubing pressure
        initiates the opening mechanism subsequent low pressure cycles are required to complete the
        initiating procedure. When the last pressure cycle is bled off a sleeve powered by hydrostatic
      pressure pierces through the metal plate and folds it back into a recess in the body of the plug
       in turn providing full bore access.

3.11 Tailpipe
     The tailpipe is the section of tubing below the packer. It can consist of liner seals, nipples, entry
      guides or remote actuated tools (for setting the packer). It can be only a few feet or several
      thousand feet  (in the case of a packer set at wireline accessible angles and a liner set
       horizontal).

3.11.1 Perforated Joint
     The perforated joint is located in the tailpipe section of completion below the production packer
     and above either a landing nipple or controlled ID joint. Its purpose is to provide an alternate
      flow path in cases where wireline deployed memory gauges, and flow meters are required for
      monitoring bottom hole conditions in wells that production management is essential.

     However, there  is an inherent disadvantage with  this monitoring system whereby under
      production condition the pressure drop across the perforated joint can cause debris fall out
      which in turn is deposited on top of the wireline lock. This has caused several serious instances
       of stuck tools, fish and troublesome workovers.

3.11.2 Wireline Entry guide
     The Half or full Mule Shoe Wireline Entry Guide ( WEG ) is situated on the bottom of the tailpipe
       section. The purpose of the WEG is to provide a means of guiding the completion tailpipe
      section through the liner top and into the liner section. It is also utilised as a means of guiding
       intervention toolstrings such as wireline and coil tubing back into the tailpipe without hanging up.
      Considerable care is required in the design to ensure that both internal and external bevels are
      appropriate for the access required. A test installation and use of typical intervention toolstrings
        is also recommended.

                                   Page 24 of 25                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 330 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE


       Self aligning mule shoes are also available which should require no rotation to ensure that they
      are engaged.

4.0  Typical Completion Program

    A typical completion program will have the following steps.

     Assume that the well as been cased and cemented and that perforation will take place after
       installing the completion.

       1.  Displace drilling mud to completion fluid (including any clean up pills deemed necessary)
       2.  Pressure test production casing
       3.  Run gauge ring / junk basket to packer setting depth
       4.  Run tubing, including packer, safety valve and any other completion equipment
       5.  Space out as required
       6.  Land tubing hanger
       7.  Displace tubing to underbalance fluid
       8.  Set packer
       9.  Pressure test tubing
      10. Pressure test annulus
      11. Test safety valve
      12. Install barriers (wireline plugs) as required by barrier philosophy
      13. Nipple down BOP
      14. Install and test xmas tree
      15. Hook up to production facilities
      16. Recover plugs
      17. Perforate well
      18. Offload and produce well

5.0  Typical Workover Program

       1.  Bullhead kill well
       2.  Set plug in tailpipe
       3.  Establish tubing to annulus communication above packer (tubing punch or sliding sleeve,
           etc)
       4.  Circulate tubing and annulus to kill weight fluid
       5.   Install barriers (wireline plugs) as required by barrier philosophy
       6.  Remove xmas tree
       7.  Nipple up BOP
       8.  Recover barriers
       9.  Sever tubing above packer if required
      10. Recover tubing
      11. Recover packer
      12. Perform remedial work as required
      13. Recomplete well as per typical program above.  If the well is live at this stage then the
         packer setting operation and displacing to the tubing to underbalanced fluid will require
           additional barriers to be in place.





                                   Page 25 of 25                          Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 331 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

                  SECTION 16
            TECHNICAL LIMIT DRILLING


     Contents
1.0    Introduction                                                                 2
  1.1 Where Are We Now?                                                          2
  1.2 What Is Possible?                                                            2
  1.3  Perfect Performance                                                          3
2.0   Base Assumptions                                                            3
3.0    Technical Limit – Well Planning                                                  3
4.0    Technical Limit – Operations                                                    4





                                   Page 1 of 4                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 332 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE



1.0  Introduction

      Technical Limit Drilling is a performance improvement process that advocates the pursuit of
     sound engineering and proper planning to both the onshore planning and offshore execution
     phases of well construction.

          It  is nothing new and is certainly not rocket science.  It was  first called Technical Limit by
     Woodside, operating on the North West shelf of Australia in the early 1990’s. This was based on
      the improvements that Unocal, Thailand achieved in the late 1980’s and early 1990’s. Since then
      Shell have adopted a similar principle and called it Drilling The Limit (DTL) and Amerada Hess
     To The Limit (T2L).

     The Technical limit philosophy is based around two questions relating to performance.

      •  Where are we now?
      •  What is possible?

1.1  Where Are We Now?
      This question can be answered by reviewing past performance or historical data.

       Essentially   it  involves  breaking  the  well down  into  discrete phases and  identifying  the
      conventional lost time or down time that has occurred.  This data can then be reviewed and
      steps taken to prevent this down time from occurring again.

     Examples of this include:

      •   Determining the root cause of hole instability on directional wells
      •  Running vibration subs to eliminate downhole vibration that was responsible for multiple
            twist offs
      •   Utilising a hydraulic swivel packing instead of a conventional swivel packing to eliminate rig
        down time

1.2  What Is Possible?
     Once the current level of performance has been established the question then becomes one of
     where could our level of performance go or what is possible?

      This is a two stage process that first challenges existing practices (that’s the way we’ve always
     done it is no longer an acceptable answer) and secondly starts asking what if?

      Challenging existing practice focuses on what is known as Invisible Lost Time (ILT). ILT is time
       that is not classed as down time, but is time that is never the less not productive or is inefficient.

     Examples of this include:

      •  Slow ROP
      •   Excessive connection time caused by outdated practices

      Asking what  if focuses on enhancements to equipment or identifies new technology that will
      improve the overall time taken to perform a specific operation.

     Examples of this include:

      •   Rotary steerable tools
      •   Multilaterals
      •   Dual activity derricks



                                   Page 2 of 4                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 333 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

1.3  Perfect Performance
     The objective of the previous two steps is to come up with the perfect well or Technical Limit as
     shown below.


                            Performance here
                              needs new
                                technology

                                                           Total valid target range


                                                       Valid target range for current technology

                                                                      “Normal” target
                                                                        range


                        Theoretical                        Invisible                  Conventional
                        Well time                     Lost time                Lost or down time


                                              Removable Time
 Plus:
 •No injuries
 •Zero defects (skins, etc…)

                                   Technical Limit                “Normal” Best
                                      (or theoretical best)               Performance


2.0  Base Assumptions

     To achieve Technical Limit the following assumptions are assumed:

      •  No activity is rushed, safety is not compromised
      •    All people are competent and perfectly informed as to their tasks
      •    All tools, materials and people are available precisely when needed.
      •    All tools (including the rig) are fit for purpose and no tools fail.
      •    All maintenance is done off the critical path.
      •  The casing program is the minimum needed for well integrity.
      •  Each section of hole is drilled with one assembly and one bit.
      •  ROP is the on bottom composite best in the field or region (including a 5 minute connection
          time per stand)
      •   Hole condition is perfect and does not require wiper trips or clean out trips.

    Some of the above might not be possible at the present moment in time (eg not all maintenance
     can be done off the critical path). However, the objective is to show what is possible and to
     change the thought process. It should now be a question of how can this be done safely and
     more efficiently rather than how did we do this last time.

3.0  Technical Limit – Well Planning

      Technical Limit should not be considered as a discrete step in the well planning process.  It
      should be considered as an integral part of the complete process.

          It involves the following steps:

      •  Downtime Review. By identifying the main areas of downtime from offset wells a suitable
         improvement plan can be developed and implemented, to ensure that downtime is not
          repeated.
      •  Peer Reviews. Peer reviews at various stages of the well design are held to ensure that
           opportunities are being identified and risks mitigated.


                                   Page 3 of 4                           Rev.0, November 2000


────────────────────────────────────────────
[ صفحه 334 از 334 ]
────────────────────────────────────────────
                   DRILLING PRACTICES COURSE

      •   Technical Limit Workshops. Technical Limit Workshops, using operator, drilling contractor
        and service company personnel from onshore and offshore, are held to ensure:
         •  The complete understanding of Technical Limit by all parties,
         •  To challenge existing practices,
         •  To identify additional opportunities
         •  To set technical limit times for the individual steps that make up the total time of each
             phase.
      •  Improvement Plan. All ideas and suggestions from the above steps are consolidated onto an
         improvement plan. The improvement plan details specific actions, the individual responsible
            for closing them out and the deadline for closing them out (if required the improvement plan
         can form part of the Lessons Learnt – see below).
      •   Communication. An important aspect of Technical Limit is the emphasis on communicating
          not only the improvement plan but the status of the actions on the improvement plan to all
           parties involved.

4.0  Technical Limit – Operations

      Technical Limit should not be considered as a discrete step in the drilling of the well. It should be
      considered as an integral part of the complete process.

          It involves the following steps:

      •   Communication. An important aspect of Technical Limit is the emphasis on communicating.
        The objective is on getting the involvement of all personnel and supporting and encouraging
        them to challenge existing practice and identify new ways of doing things.
      •   Pre-Job Planning Meeting. Meeting held at least a day prior to the start of an operation (eg
          casing running, drilling a hole section, logging, etc.). Involves the senior supervisors from all
          relevant disciplines associated with the operation and any others as required. Objective is to
          review the work plan as laid out in the drilling program, review the equipment requirements,
          review the lessons learnt from the previous time the operation was performed, challenge
           existing practices and identify and record changes that can be made to the benefit of the
           operation.
      •  Task Planning Meeting. Meeting held the shift prior to a specific task being undertaken (eg
          run BOP, picking up DP, rigging up to run casing). Involves all personnel associated with the
          operation. Objective is to review the specific task plan, review the lessons learnt from the
          previous time the task was performed, challenge existing practices and identify and record
         any changes that can be made to the benefit of the operation.
      •  Wash Up Meeting. Meeting held at the end of a job, or as required. Involves all personnel
          associated with the job. Objective is to review the job, capture the lessons learnt and identify
           future improvements.
      •  Lessons Learnt. Lessons learnt are gathered all the time, not only from all of the above
          meetings, but also from one to one conversations, safety meetings, tool box talks, THINK
              drills, START cards, etc. The Lessons Learnt  will be entered onto the Lessons Learnt
           register by the rigsite nominated Technical Limit Champion. The Lessons Learnt Register is
           available at any time for review and is used in the planning process for future wells.
      •   Monitoring and  Reporting. The  Technical  Limit  monitoring  process  revolves around
         comparing the actual with the planned or target times and displaying these graphically.
        These charts can then be displayed on the rig and in the office so that the performance
        becomes highly visible to everyone. Other performance indicators (eg casing, tripping and
       BOP running times, % downtime) can be measured and displayed.





                                   Page 4 of 4                           Rev.0, November 2000


